CASTRO DENOUNCES PARDO LLADA AS TRAITOR

Havana, Radio Progreso, in Spanish, Mar. 29, 1961, 1243 GMT--E

(Summary) In a surprise television appearance on CMQ's Mar. 28 "roundtable"
program, on which the betrayal of radio commentator Jose Pardo Llada was
being denounced, Prime Minister Fidel Castro said that Pardo Llada sold
himself for U.S. money before taking asylum in Mexico.

Castro referred to Pardo Llada's interview with a Latin American consul
published in a Miami newspaper on Mar. 11 in which reference is made to two
books which Pardo Llada promises to publish to attack the Cuban revolution,
for which he will be paid a dollar a word.  Castro said Pardo Llada's
attitude was influenced by fear, cowardice, and corruption.  He is a person
influenced by fear, cowardice, and corruption.  He is a person who does not
see much beyond his nose and will be mistaken all his life until the day
comes when he takes a few sleeping pills and commits suicide, which is the
most probable end for men of his mind, Castro said.

Pardo Llada's statements to the Miami newspaper EL MUNDO are irrefutable
proof that he had been preparing his escape for a long time and was only
awaiting an opportunity, Castro declared.  Pardo Llada was never clear, he
was never definitely and determinedly on the side of the revolution.  We
who knew Pardo Llada well, Castro said, know that one of his most prominent
characteristics was his erratic nature.

Referring to the Mar. 10 coup, Castro said Pardo Llada had a great
responsibility as spokesman for the majority party but did not know how to
face the situation.  He had thought of publishing a newspaper, but only one
issue was published.  Pardo Llada left everyone waiting for the second
issue, which never appeared.

Castro said that after this, all political groups united to fight Batista,
but Pardo Llada refused to attack him.  He always refused to attack him,
Castro said, because he received money from him, sent to him from Miami
through friends of the dictator, Jose Pardo Llada was a bad friend, as all
who had direct contact with him know.  His betrayal of the revolution was
expected, Castro declared.
