CASTRO VISITS LAW STUDENTS, PROFESSORS

Havana Reloj Nacional Network in Spanish 1615 GMT 13 October 1962--F

(Text) Prime Minister Fidel Castro visited the University of Havana on 12
October and suggested to the law students and professors that they make a
thorough survey of the reform of the judicial power and of the social
defense code. Dr. Fidel Castro proposed to the professors and law students
the establishment of popular courts in order to attend to the peculiarities
of the distinct zones of the country. He promised to teach a class on law
within the next few days. Fidel mentioned the indemnization for the
mercenaries and said that it would have to be for the amount of 62 million
dollars in things like medicine, medical equipment, and so forth, and what
it could not be less than 62 million dollars.

Dr. Fidel Castro also announced a new tourist plan which will be
inaugurated on 15 December and that 100 guests houses are being made ready
in Varadero. Fidel also praised the incorporation of the women into every
front.

In his appearance at the university last night during which he spoke to the
professors and students for more than one and a half hours, the Prime
Minister showed an interest in the educational activity of the university.
Talking to Professor Antonio (Secas?), professor of law, Fidel asked that
the students pledge themselves to make a thorough survey of the legal
reforms needed by the country within a year. In his insistence on the
establishment of popular tribunals, Fidel said that when a legal problem
croped up in the Pico Turquino, for example, if could not be solved on the
spot because there is no court there and the case has to be brought to the
attention of the El Corbre court.

As for the new tourist plan, Fidel pointed out that the guest houses now
being readied will charge the adults 3.50 pesos and two pesos for children
under six. Fidel Castro explained that the new tourist plan included a
Havana-Varadero automobile line that will charge three pesos per person and
that the government is looking into the possibility of using trains and
trucks to transport the tourists.

At another point of his speech Fidel spoke about the good results of the
coffee harvest and said that the scholarship holders must do some kind of
work during 45 days of the year as part of the educational plan. Fidel said
that soon a law will be approved granting the worker who is studying a
reduction in the work day to six hours so that he may have more time to
devote to his studies.
