FIDEL CASTRO ADDRESSES FEU SESSION

Havana Radio Centro in Spanish 1830 GMT 16 August 1962--F

(Text) Prime Minister Fidel Castro had a meeting with the leaders of the
Federation of University Students, FEU, in the hall of martyrs of Havana
University. The meeting was also attended by the heads of the several
faculties and distinct problems related to university reform were
discussed.

Juan Marinello, rector of Havana University, Jose Revellon, president of
the FEU, and other student leaders were also present. Marinello opened the
meeting with a detailed account of the work being done in the several
faculties and schools, in accordance with the revision of the educational
system in this center. Several faculty heads spoke next, each of them
presenting his point of view on the progress of the university reform and
pointing out the success achieved by the reform so far and the problems
expected in the several schools.

Prime Minister Fidel then spoke and pointed out that it was logical to
expect difficulties but that the ruling body of the university was in the
best position to make the necessary objective corrections. Fidel mentioned
the need of training teachers in the duty of historical and dialectical
materialism and he informed the students present that, in order to train
these men, four to six weeks courses will be offered to students of the
university, preferably to those enrolled in the schools of economy,
education, law, and philosophy.

Fidel then said that, because of the low level of education in the
secondary schools--the result of bad organization for a long time-- special
classes will be given in the university for such students. Fidel Castro
also said he favored the idea of a six-hour day for workers who are
studying so that they can have more time to improve themselves mentally.
Fidel reiterated that the revolutionary government is willing to give every
necessary aid, both to the university and the students in general.

The maximum leader of the revolution suggested that Rector Marinello, who
has the confidence of the revolutionary government, meet with the faculty
and students in order to discuss all problems.
