ARRIVAL OF THE ALGERIAN PREMIER IN CUBA

Peking NCNA in English to Asia and Europe 0214 GMT 17 October 1962--W

(Text) Havana--Algerian Premier Ben Bella arrived in Havana on 16 October
by plane for a friendly visit at the invitation of the Cuban Government.
The Algerian Premier was greeted at the airport by Cuban President
Dorticos, Premier Castro, government ministers, and members of the
diplomatic corps.

After a gun salute, Ben Bella reviewed an honor guard composed of members
of the three armed forces and militiamen. Thunderous applause broke out
from the huge crowd at the airport, who shouted, "Welcome, Ben Bella,
friend of the Cuban people!" "Long live Cuba-Algerian friendship!" and
"Long live free Algeria."

In a welcoming speech, Premier Castro said that the visit of the Algerian
Premier, made at a time when U.S. imperialism was redoubling its hostility
and hatred toward Cuba, was a valiant act, an act of political firmness,
which the Cuban people would never forget. Castro pointed out that the
Cuban and Algerian peoples were engaged in a common battle for
self-determination and independence and this battle would not end until
final victory. When the people are determined to take their destiny into
their own hands, no imperialism, colonialism or neocolonialism, could
prevent them, Castro added.

Ben Bella said in reply that the Algerian people had been aware of, had
followed, and admired at every stage the Cuban people's struggle since it
began in the Maestra Mountains. The victory of the Giron Beach battle was
celebrated in Algeria as if it were the Algerian people's own victory.
Algeria will always stand by Cuba and the two peoples will never be
separated, concluded Ben Bella.

Accompanied by Dorticos and Castro, Ben Bella later drove to the city in an
open vehicle. He was warmly greeted by hundreds of thousands of Havana
inhabitants who lined the highway, waving national flags of the two
countries. The Cuban papers devoted special columns and commentaries to the
visit.
