CASTRO CITES DIFFICULTIES OF REVOLUTION

Santiago Chile PRENSA LATINA in Spanish to PRENSA LATINA Havana 1432 GMT 1
Oct 71 C--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Excerpts] Santiago, Chile 1 Oct--Today's edition of 28 DE ABRIL, published
by workers at the former Yarur textile plant--now subsidized by the
government-- carries greetings from Fidel Castro.

Several days ago, Fidel was given a copy of 28 DE ABRIL containing
greetings from workers at the plant. He showed interest in the industry's
problems, and he knew a lot about the details of the textile industry
expropriation. Exhibiting a great sense of humor, he called Yarur "that
little Moor" (Turk is not used in Cuba) and even knew about the anecdote
about the skull.

Fidel stressed the importance of true worker participation in managing
nationalized industries--which would solve many difficulties that could
arise in Chile. He was very explicit as he discussed worker
responsibilities and the difficulty of carrying out a revolution.

"I think it is a very good thing for the masses to know that in carrying
out a revolution they have not conquered the heavens--that they had not won
the heavens when they reached power. What we inherited was really hell,"
Fidel told reporters who asked about difficulties that arise in a
revolution.

"It is very important for the masses to know that well being is not just
around the corner, and that imperialism and capitalism did not leave us a
garden of Eden or paradise. Paradise has to be built; built with work. That
is one of the lessons we have learned."

He pointed out that together with social changes, other phenomena take
place. Factors exerting a tremendous restraint on man disappear, and man
develops a new conscience. Then there is a tendency to slow down.

"Every revolution produces many changes. The new power disorganizes
everything, disconnects everything, starting with the administrating class.
Other classes take over, other men without accumulated experience."

Discussing problems of supplies, Fidel explained: "There exists a
philosophy in capitalism of full warehouses, with rationing imposed by
money. They always display beautiful things in the stores, but that is not
even 5 percent of what is needed for a year's distribution. The illusion is
maintained that behind those windows, the place is full of goods, and
paradise behind that. That is nothing but a facade, a showcase. Some of
them are empty and that is why there is not enough for everybody. If the
revolution is going to distribute, it certainly cannot distribute what it
does not have."

Asked how the masses became revolutionary, Fidel stated: "I think the
masses became revolutionary because we made revolutionary laws... and those
revolutionary laws, the struggle against imperialism, the defense of the
revolution, have created today's conscience: that sense of national unity
of forces which is the ideal of every country."
