CASTRO, SUGAR WORKERS VISIT RURAL SCHOOL

Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1102 GMT 2 Sep 71 F

[Text] At the invitation of the Revolutionary Government Prime Minister Maj
Fidel Castro, the sugar workers delegates who attended the sugar industry
plenum and the national congress of sugar workers visited the Ceiba No. 1
secondary rural school. In talks held with the delegates the prime
minister, who went along on the tour, inquired if they had had the
opportunity to visit some of the things that are under construction which
are similar to the ones that will be constructed at sugar mills.

Prime Minister Castro pointed out that the construction going on in Alamar,
which was previously visited, and the Ceiba No. 1 school are the results of
the efforts of the working people who are trying to advance the social
construction program. He also pointed out the need for developing a
generation which is technically trained. "That is why we must tie together
the education of the youngster with productive work," underscored Major
Castro in referring to the education of the youngsters who will graduate
from school centers such as the one being visited.

Our commander in chief added that the students graduating from rural
schools will be the foundation of an economy valuable in resources to the
country. He also said: "When we have 1,000 or 1,200 centers of this type,
the value of this production will be outstanding." He also talked about the
excellent conditions of the citrus plantations that are the responsibility
of the young students.

In talks held with the sugar workers, Major Castro explained that by the
upcoming month of December a total of 30 brigades will be formed to
construction schools similar to the Ceiba No. 1 type. In remarks addressed
to delegates of the Venezuela sugar mill of Camaguey Province, our prime
minister dwelled on the construction of a technological institute in that
location which could be attended by about 1,000 students, and similar
centers in areas of the Brazil, Ciro Redondo, and Uruguay sugar mills.

Major Castro stressed that all sugar workers will play a very important
role in education. He urged them all to fulfill their duty as educators of
the new generation recruited for work at the sugar mills. In this respect
he said: "We are going to assume that the students are an integral part of
production, but we are also going to assume that you are an integral part
of the revolutionary educational system."

During most of the morning the sugar workers participated in several sport
activities that were held at the Ceiba No. 1 secondary basic school. Teams
from Matanzas and Oriente provinces played the first baseball game of the
three that were held between provincial teams. Other groups played chess,
ping-pong, swimming activities, bicycle races, and many others. Students
from primary, secondary, and preuniversity schools participated in the
cultural event that was held for the visitors. The solidarity with the
fraternal Latin American peoples and the communist militant Angela Davis
was expressed through the many acts presented by the students.
