FIDEL CASTRO ADDRESSES WFDY VOLUNTEERS

[Editorial Report C--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY] Havana PRELA in Spanish at 2150
GMT on 30 July stated that the inauguration of the "Jorge Dimitrov"
secondary school, voluntarily built by an international youth brigade, was
the occasion for Maj Fidel Castro to proclaim once again that socialism and
internationalism are the swords in the world today. The Cuban prime
minister delivered an impromptu speech stressing the profound meaning of
international solidarity to the 84 youths of 28 countries who came to Cuba
in January this year to build the modern school, having been summoned by
the World Federation of Democratic Youth [WFDY].

Fidel had a dialog with the youths from Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin
America on a night of internationalist dedication where an idea was put
into practice and as Castro pointed out had been converted into a beautiful
reality in less than a year. Fidel Castro said that the school is a
long-lasting symbol of the friendship and solidarity of the world's
revolutionary youth with the Cuban revolution. Pointing to the buildings,
the Cuban leader commented on their physical beauty.

"But their moral beauty is much more extraordinary," Fidel Castro declared,
emphasizing that more important than the school itself, is the idea of
international solidarity, in which the world's revolutionary youth have
abundant opportunity to express their generous feelings toward the
underdeveloped countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. As on his tour
through 10 countries of Africa and Europe, the Cuban statesman stressed the
important role of youth in the world today and the one they will fulfill in
the future when the great differences between the poor countries and the
wealthy nations will become more and more evident.

Fidel Castro explained that the "Jorge Dimitrov" school, approximately 50
kms from Havana, fits within the framework of a new Cuban educational
strategy which leans to the systematic connection between study and work as
basic elements for the complete training of the new generations.

"In 1961 Cuba did not dream of schools like this," said Fidel Castro,
recalling the national literacy campaign then undertaken by the Cuban
Government. Eleven years later, he further asserted these schools, their
methods and objectives, are another kind of revolution in education, an
ideal weapon for solving development problems of a country such as Cuba,
which lacks vast wealth and has a high percentage of young people in its
population.

Fidel Castro stressed that his administration wants every youth to study
and work, to apply at other educational levels the same method of linking
work and study. He reported that within 2 months, in September, another 40
schools like this one will begin operating in Cuba with a registration of
20,000 students. He said that in September next year there will be 150
similar schools and 2,000 in 11 years, including grade schools, technical
institutes, and university centers.

The Cuban leader said that as UNESCO experts have already noted, this
experience could be useful to other developing countries which, despite
their material limitations, are determined to bring about a significant
leap in education and in the economy as Cuba has done. He said that Cuba is
working for the future through this educational plan linked to
production--a plan which on a previous occasion he had described as a
necessary process for a revolutionary country and as indispensable for a
nation with few resources such as Cuba.

The Cuban leader said he is convinced that a far-reaching revolution is
being carried out on the island, "Although we are aware of the wide gaps
and of how much we must improve our revolutionary task." He emphasized the
importance of this task in view of the fact that it will be carried out
only a few miles from the United States, and despite the fact that during
its first years as a revolutionary country. Cuba has had to devote itself
almost entirely to survival.

Fidel Castro recalled the 26 July mass rally, which was eternally dedicated
to international solidarity and support for Vietnam as a demonstration of
the internationalist education of the Cuban people--people who are
impressing those who are now beginning to become acquainted with them
first-hand.

He called on the World Federation of Democratic Youth [WFDY] and the
world's youth to make Vietnam the future camp of solidarity, both in the
north and the south, and he expressed his conviction that the victory of
these people over U.S. imperialism draws closer every day. He added that
when compared to the lack of morale among the mercenaries, the morale,
energy and heroism of the revolutionaries--which leads them to victory
after victory--make the inevitable victory of the South Vietnamese patriots
a foregone conclusion.

However, the leader of the Cuban revolution said that it is now more
necessary than ever for the peoples to mobilize in support of the just
cause of the Vietnamese people. He praised WFDY for its project to build a
hospital in the DRV, and he said that in this project the WFDY can count on
Cuban men, equipment and resources for its use.

The Cuban prime minister also urged the WFDY to offer its aid to
revolutionary and poor countries such as Guinea, where there is a great
need for (?them), despite the many political and cultural achievements of
the democratic party led by President Sekou Toure.

Speaking of the forthcoming world youth festival to be held in Berlin in
1973. Fidel Castro announced that "a very strong Cuban delegation" will
attend. He added: "I was happy to recall that the GDR--a country of
extraordinary merits in the first ranks of the socialist camp--will be the
site of this festival." Fidel Castro recalled his visit to the GDR, in
whose people he was able to a witness a strong internationalist spirit, and
he said Cuba will work [for] the world youth festival. "I am sorry I will
not be able to go to Berlin at that time," the Cuban leader said.

Before ending his 42-minute speech, he said that, in keeping with the
unanimous feelings of the members of the brigade, the school should bear
the name of the great internationalist, Georgi Dimitrov, in honor of the
90th anniversary of his birth celebrated recently. Fidel Castro closed the
ceremony by saying, "that is a beautiful name for this school and will
oblige the students to exert themselves to make it the best school in
Cuba."
