TEXT OF JOINT STATEMENT ON VISIT OF CUBAN DELEGATION

Hanoi VNA in English 1553 GMT 18 Sep 73 B

[Text] Hanoi VNA September 18--Follows the full text of the joint statement
issued here on the recent visit to Vietnam of the Cuban party and
government delegation:

At the invitation of the Central Committee of the Vietnam Workers Party and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, a delegation of the
Communist Party of Cuba and the Cuban Revolutionary Government led by Fidel
Castro Ruz, first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of Cuba and premier of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, has paid an
official friendship visit to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. It arrived
in Hanoi on September 12 and left here on September 17, 1973.

During its visit to Vietnam, the delegation of the Communist Party and
Revolutionary Government of Cuba laid a wreath at the war dead monument,
toured Quang Binh Province and Vinh Linh area, visited a number of
economic, cultural establishments and spots of historic significance and
met representatives of the Vietnamese people of various strata.

Wherever it went, the delegation received an extremely warm and cordial
welcome from the Vietnamese people, which was a brilliant expression of the
militant solidarity and fraternal friendship that has long bound the
Vietnamese and Cuban peoples together. The delegation of the Cuban party
and government expressed its sincere thanks for this reception.

A delegation of the Vietnam Workers Party and the Government of the
Domestic Republic of Vietnam held talks with the delegation of the
Communist Party of Cuba and the Cuban Revolutionary Government on the new
developments of the revolutionary struggle of the Vietnamese people, on the
socialist construction and national defense of the Cuban people, on the
further strengthening of the fraternal friendship and cooperation between
the two parties and the war countries [Hanoi in Vietnamese to Vietnam at
1115 GMT on 18 September, in its version of the communique, says of "two
countries," not "war countries"] and on their problems of mutual concern.

Taking part in the talks, on the Vietnamese side, were:

-Le Duan, first secretary of the Vietnam Workers Party, Central Committee,
head delegate;
-Truong Chinh, member of the Political Bureau of the party Central
Committee, chairman of the National Assembly Standing Committee;
-Pham Van Dong, member of the Political Bureau of the party Central
Committee, premier of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam;
-General Vo Nguyen Giap, member of the Political Bureau of the party
Central Committee, vice-premier and minister of national defense;
-Nguyen Duy Trinh, member of the Political Bureau of the party Central
Committee, vice- premier and minister for foreign affairs;
-Hoang Anh, secretary of the party Central Committee and vice-premier of
the government;
-Hoang Tung, alternate member of the party Central Committee, president of
the Vietnam- Cuba Friendship Association; -Hoang Van Loi, vice-minister for
foreign affairs; and
-Nguyen Thanh Ha, head of the Department for Cuba and Latin America of the
Foreign Ministry.

On the Cuban side were:

-Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Cuba, premier of the Revolutionary Government, head
delegate;
-Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, member of the Secretariat of the party
Central Committee, vice-premier of the Revolutionary Government, in charge
of external relations, and chairman of the National Commission for
Economic, Scientific and Technical Co-operation;
-Osmany Cienfuegos, member of the party Central Committee;
-Melba Hernandez, president of the Cuban Committee of Solidarity With
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos
-Hector Rodriguez Llompart, deputy chairman of the National Commission for
Economic Scientific and Technical Co-operation; and
-Raul Valdes Vivo, ambassador of the Repulic of Cuba to the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam.

The talks proceeded in an atmosphere of cordiality pervaded with the joy of
victory and with warm militant solidarity and fraternal friendship. The two
sides reached identity of views on all the problems discussed.

The delegation of the Vietnam Workers Party and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam expressed the warmest sentiments and
profound admiration of the Vietnamese people for the heroic people of Cuba.

The Vietnamese people value very highly the historic significance and
international import of the Cuban revolution. With the brilliant victory of
the January 1959 revolution Cuba freed herself from the neocolonialist yoke
and moved forward on the road of socialism. This is a combination of the
protracted struggle against the Spanish colonialists and U.S. imperialists,
a combination of the struggle for national liberation and the struggle for
class liberation, combination of the two great revolutionary trends in the
present era; the socialist revolution and the movement for national
liberation. Cuba, the first country in Latin America to be freed from
neocolonialist domination and the first country in the Western Hemisphere
to build socialism, has stood proudly and firmly at the gate of U.S.
imperialism. This event bears a paramount significance toward the
development of the world revolution. The great victories of the Cuban
people in fighting and in construction have encouraged the nations in Latin
America and in the world to liberate themselves from U.S. neocolonialist
domination. The prestige and influence of socialist Cuba have been
unceasingly heightened.

The Vietnamese people warmly welcome and highly rejoice over the great
achievements recorded by the Cuban people in their economic construction,
their defense capabilities and their cultural and social activities. Cuba
is the first country in Latin America to have eliminated illiteracy, done
away with unemployment and other social evils left by the old society.
Under the leadership of the Communist Party and the Revolutionary
Government headed by Comrade Fidel Castro Ruz, the Cuban people are
resolved to advance to socialism, work with self-abnegation, strengthen the
defense capabilities of their country, vigorously apply modern science and
technology, accelerate economic development, and create deep charges as
never seen before in the history of Cuba.

The Vietnamese people express their deep admiration for the heroic Cuban
people who have constantly upheld the banner of national independence and
socialism in Latin America, foiling step by step the policy of aggression,
encirclement and blockade of U.S. imperialism aimed at putting down the
Cuban revolution. This is a brilliant manifestation of the vigorous and
irrestible vitality of the Cuban revolution.

Closley bound to the Cuban people in the struggle against the common enemy,
the Vietnamese people resolutely support the Cuban people's just struggle
against the policy of economic blockade of the United States government and
demand that the latter dismantle unconditionally their military base at
Guantanamo, part of Cuba's territory. The Vietnamese people firmly believe
that the fraternal Cuban people will obtain many new and yet greater
successes in the cause of defending their revolutionary gains, building
socialism, developing culture and economy and continuing to enhance their
brilliant example of revolutionary heroism in Latin America and the world
over.

The delegation of the Communist Party and the Revolutionary Government of
Cuba warmly welcomed the Vietnamese people's great victory in the
resistance war against U.S. imperialism, for national salvation. The
Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam, acknowledged by
the International Conference on Vietnam has asserted the Vietnamese
people's fundamental national rights: independence, sovereignty, unity, and
territorial integrity of Vietnam and the right to self-determination of the
South Vietnamese people. Together with the June 13, 1973 joint communique,
this agreement was a manifestation of the victory of historic significance
and international import of the Vietnamese people. This also was a common
victory of the peoples of the Indochinese countries, of the socialist
countries, of the non-aligned countries, and of the peace- and
justice-loving people throughout the world.

The delegation of the party and Government of Cuba deeply rejoiced over the
successes recorded by the Vietnamese people in all domains while carrying
abreast fighting and production, in the cause of socialist construction in
North Vietnam.

The Cuban people firmly support the Vietnamese people's struggle in the new
stage to preserve and consolidate a durable peace, build socialism in the
north, achieve independence and democracy in the south, and proceed to the
peaceful reunification of the fatherland, thus making contributions to the
defense of peace in Indochina, Southeast Asia and the world.

[The] Cuban people and government firmly support the just stand of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam as well as of the
Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam to
strictly respect and scrupulously implement the Paris agreement on Vietnam.

The two sides sternly concern the United States and the Saigon
administration for systematically violating the extremely important
provisions of the Paris agreement concerning the ceasefire, the restoration
of peace, the democratic liberties of the people, the return of captured
and detained civilian personnel, the achievement of national reconciliation
and concord, the obligation of the United States to contribute to the
healing of the wounds of war in the Domestic Republic of Vietnam and the
activities of the Two-Party Joint Military Commission and the International
Commission of Control and Supervision.

The two sides resolutely demand that the U.S. and the Saigon administration
end all their violations of the Paris agreement on Vietnam, strictly
respect and scrupulously implement all the articles of the agreement and
the provisions already agreed upon in the joint communique of June 13,
1973, particularly the provisions on the ceasefire and the return of all
captured civilians and the exercise of democratic freedoms. The Cuban side
resolutely supports the constructive proposals of the Provisional
Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam on June 28, 1973
on the settlement of the internal affairs of South Vietnam by a peaceful
and democratic way in the spirit of national reconciliation and concord and
on the basis of the recognition of the existence of two administrations,
two armies, two zones of control and three political forces in South
Vietnam.

The Cuban side is greatly elated at the ever growing prestige in Vietnam as
well as in the world, of the South Vietnam National Front for Liberation
and the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South
Vietnam, the sole legitimate representative of the South Vietnamese people.
It reaffirms its determination to continue developing its relations of
militant solidarity with the South Vietnam National Front for Liberation
and the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South
Vietnam.

The two sides warmly welcome the Lao people's great victory in their
struggle against U.S. aggression, for national salvation, victory brought
out by the signing of the Vientiane Agreement on Restoring Peace and
Achieving National Concord in Laos and its protocol. They resolutely
support the stand of the Lao Patriotic Front with Prince Souphanouvong as
chairman to scrupulously implement the Vientiane agreement and its
protocol, and at the same in order to consolidate peace, achieve national
concord and advance toward the building of a peaceful, independent,
neutral, democratic, unified and prosperous Laos. [The Vietnamese version
renders the preceding sentence as follows: "... the Vientiane agreement and
its protocol, and at the same time demand that the United States and the
Vientiane side do likewise in order to consolidate peace...."]

The two sides warmly welcome the resounding exploits of the Cambodian
people and resolutely support the Cambodian people's just struggle under
the leadership of the National United Front of Kampuchea, with Samdech Head
of State Norodom Sinanouk as chairman, and the Royal Government of National
Union of Cambodia with Samdech Penn Nouth as prime minister and Mr Khieu
Samphan as deputy prime minister.

The Cambodian people and the People's National Liberation Armed Forces of
Cambodia will certainly win final victory in their struggle against U.S.
aggression, for national salvation, to build an independent, peaceful,
neutral, democratic and prosperous Cambodia on the while national
territory, in keeping with the five-point proclamation of March 23, 1970 of
Head of State Norodom Sihanouk, and the political program of the National
United Front of Kampuchea.

The two sides resolutely demand that the United States put an end to all
its acts of intervention and aggression in Laos and Cambodia, strictly
respect the Lao and Cambodian people's right of being masters of their
respective country, thus letting the Lao and Cambodian peoples settle the
internal affairs of their respective country themselves without foreign
interference.

The two sides hold that fraternal solidarity among the Vietnamese, Lao and
Cambodian peoples, which is strengthened and developed with every passing
day, constitutes a decisive factor for maintaining peace in Indochina and
building their respective country in accordance with the specific
conditions and aspirations of the people of each country.

Manifesting the profound feelings of the Vietnamese people, the delegation
of the Vietnam Workers Party and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of Vietnam expressed its sincere gratitude to the Communist Party, the
Revolutionary Government and the people of Cuba for their firm support and
wholehearted assistance to the Vietnamese people's resistance against U.S.
aggression, for national salvation, and socialist construction in the
spirit of proletarian internationalism. This support and assistance
constitutes a vigorous stimulus to the Vietnamese people, and a
contribution to the Vietnamese people's great victory.

The two sides take the view that at present the revolutionary movement of
the people of various countries is developing powerfully. The forces of
socialism, of the national liberation movement and the movement of the
nonalined countries struggling for national independence, and the movement
for democracy and peace are stronger than the imperialist, reactionary and
warlike forces and have recorded big victories in the struggle against
imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism led by U.S. imperialism.

The victory of the Vietnamese people in their resistance war against the
U.S. aggressors which led to the signing of the Paris agreement on Vietnam,
has seriously weakened imperialism, and made an important contribution to
the consolidation of peace and security in Asia and the world.

Nevertheless, the U.S.-led imperialists have not yet reconciled themselves
to failure. They are seeking to oppose the socialist camps, oppose the
nonalined countries, dam up and repress the national liberation movement
and the workers movement, and oppose the struggle for peace of the world
people. That is why, the world people should increase their unity, heighten
their vigilance and struggle hard against them.

The two sides warmly welcome the brilliant achievements obtained by the
fraternal socialist countries in socialist construction and in the building
of the material and technical foundation of communism.

The two sides firmly support the just struggle of the Asian, African and
Latin American peoples against imperialism, colonialism and
neo-colonialism, for national independence and freedom, [and] firmly
support the struggle of the working class and the people in the world for
peace, independence, democracy and socialism.

The two sides sternly condemn the military coup d'etat staged by the
reactionaries in Chile, lackeys of the U.S. imperialists, against the
government of the Popular Unity Coalition--a legal and constitutional
government headed by President Salvador Allende-- strongly support the just
struggle of the Chilean people and firmly believe that this struggle will
finally triumph, and that the imperialists and reactionaries can by no
means prevent the ever more powerful development of the revolution in Latin
America.

The two sides acclaim the steps of struggle taken by the Peruvian
Government to regain the natural resources of the country, [and] support
the correct decision of the Panamanian Government to demand for the
invoilable right of the Panamanian people to fully exercise their
sovereignty on the whole territory of their country. The two sides welcome
the victory of the people's forces in Argentina, fully support the right to
self-determination of the Puerto Rican people and express their solidarity
with the struggle for independence of the Puerto Rican people.

The two sides resolutely support the Asian, African and Latin American
peoples who are demanding the withdrawal of the U.S. Armed Forces and
military bases from the territory of the countries in this region.

On the situation in the Middle East, the two delegations condemn Israel,
abetted by U.S. imperialism, its ally, for occupying the territory of the
Arab countries and carrying out its expansionist policy in this region, and
assert their solidarity with the Palestinian people in their struggle to
regain their lost rights.

The two sides affirm their solidarity with the struggle of all the
liberation movements of the newly-independent countries in Africa against
imperialism, and colonialism and neo-colonialism, and underscore their full
support for the armed struggle of the people in Guinea Bissau, Angola and
Mozambique aimed at eliminating the colonialist rule and gaining their
national independence, and at the same time, condemn the policy of racial
discrimination pursued by the Pretoria and Salisbury regimes against the
nations in South Africa, Namibia and Zimbawe.

The two sides warmly welcome the success of the recent 4th Summit
Conference of Nonalined Countries in Algiers. The success of this
conference has given a great stimulus to the struggle of the world's
peoples for independence and freedom. The conference has accorded strong
support to the just struggle of the peoples of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia,
and formally declared that the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the
Republic of South Vietnam is the sole legitimate representative of the
South Vietnamese people. The two sides firmly believe that on the basis of
enhanced unity along the nonalined countries and of close solidarity
between the nonalined countries and the socialist countries, the struggle
of the nonalined countries against imperialism and colonialism, old and
new, will win splendid victory.

The two sides hold that the restoration and consolidation of unity among
the socialist countries, and within the international communist and workers
movement on the basis of Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism,
the strengthening of the alliance between the socialist system and the
forces struggling for national independence, [and] the strengthening and
expansion of the world's people's front against imperialism and
colonialism, old and new, are of specially important significance to the
struggle for peace, national independence, democracy and socialism. The
Vietnam Workers Party and the Communist Party of Cuba will make increasing
contributions to this case of international unity.

The two sides note with satisfaction that the militant solidarity, mutual
support and fraternal cooperation between the Vietnam Workers Party and the
Community Party of Cuba, [and] between the Vietnamese and Cuban peoples,
are developing splendidly. The two sides express their determination to do
their best to constantly enhance and develop the militant solidarity and
fraternal cooperation between the Vietnamese and Cuban peoples, in the
interest of the peoples of the two countries and of the revolutionary cause
of the world's people.

For this purpose, the two sides discussed measures for enhancing and
strengthening the fraternal friendship and developing the cooperation in
all fields between the two countries.

The two sides discussed measures for supporting and assisting the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam in overcoming the sequels of the war and
stepping up the socialist construction.

The two sides hold that the friendship visit to Vietnam by the delegation
of the Communist Party and Revolutionary Government of Cuba led by Comrade
Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Cuba, and premier of the Cuban Revolutionary government is a
splendid manifestation of the Vietnam-Cuba friendship and a positive
contribution to the development of the cooperation in all fields between
the two countries.

On behalf of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba and the
Cuban Revolutionary Government, Comrade Fidel Castro Ruz invited a
delegation of the Vietnam Workers Party and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam to pay an official visit to the Republic of
Cuba. The Vietnamese side accepted the invitation with gratitude.
