CASTRO ON U.S. REACTIONS, CIA ASSASSINATIONS PLANS

Montreal International Service in English 2104 GMT 21 Mar 75 LD

[Text] Fidel Castro says that sooner or later the United States will
recognize Cuba and he says Havana is not impatient, adding that the Cubans
do not have an embargo against Washington.

The Cuban prime minister made his remarks to Canadian reporters at our
embassy in Havana. Dr Castro had gone to the embassy for a reception for
the minister of trade, Alastair Gillespie, Lionel Martin has the details:

Prime Minister Castro fielded a variety of questions on the possibility of
an opening with the United State. The possibility exists, replied Dr
Castro, and he added: Lately there has been a certain lessening of tension
between the United States and Cuba. In practical terms, however, there
still hasn't been much progress, but we consider in Kissinger's recent
statements on Cuba as positive.

Would you like the United States to recognize Cuba. Dr Castro was asked. We
are really no impatient about it, sooner or later it will happen. When it
does, we will consider it a positive event.

On the U.S. embargo Dr Castro said that it should be lifted before Cuba can
enter into negotiations with the United State, because the embargo is a
coersive and unilateral policy on the part of the United States. Dr Castro
added: We don't have any embargo against the United States. If at any time
they need sugar we are ready to sell it to them.

Dr Castro was asked his opinion about reports in the American press that
the CIA had mounted a number of plans for his assassination. He replied
that he was aware over the years that many plans for his assassination had
been organized with the backing of the CIA. But, Dr Castro added, we have
been (?able) to survive, which simply shows a certain inefficiency on the
part of the CIA.

The Cuban prime minister also answered a number of questions on
Cuban-Canadian relations. He called these relations exemplary. We don't
have one single-complaint with Canada.

Commerce is developing, and we are interested in maintaining our good
relations with Canada.
