CASTRO SEES NO RADICAL CHANGES IN LATIN AMERICA SOON

Buenos Aires IPS in Spanish 2259 GMT 10 Jan 75 PA

[Text] Mexico City, 10 Jan--"We must be realistic. Changes similar to those
of the Cuban revolution are not within sight in the Latin American
countries." This statement was made by Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro
during an impromptu news conference with Mexican newsmen who are
accompanying the artistic and cultural delegation headed by Mexican
President Luis Echeverria's wife. The delegation is leaving today for
Jamaica.

Jose Reveles, special correspondent for EXCELSIOR, has reported textual
passages of Castro's dialog with the Mexican newsmen regarding Latin
America's situation and the possibility of profound and radical changes
taking place like those which occurred in Cuba 61 years ago.

Castro said in this regard: "Naturally, the initial objectives of the Cuban
revolution have been to develop the revolution within Cuba's society and
the nation itself. We cannot have revolutionary objectives for others,
because this is something which affects the people of each country and no
one can do this for them. That is quite clear...."

"We feel very happy each time a change takes place, each time a new
progressive government and a new progressive policy emerge," Castro said.
He then gave his point of view in connection with revolutionary changes in
Latin America by stating: "I do not believe the possibility of such radical
changes as those which took place in Cuba are within sight at this moment.
Even though all objectives conditions for radical changes in Latin America
do exist, it is undeniable that the subjective conditions are not yet
present; but we, as revolutionaries, salute the process of change."

Castro cited the nationalistic trend as an example of these processes of
change. According to Fidel Castro, it is very positive because it runs
parallel to a spirit of independence and, according to him, both the
nationalist current and the spirit of independence are changes. "They are
positive changes, progressive changes," he said.

"This aspiration of the Latin American people to recover their natural
resources is a positive change, even though it may not be socialism. This
confrontation between the interests of the people and some Latin American
governments and imperialism is a positive change, even though it may not be
a socialist process. This greater awareness of the need for Latin American
integration is a positive change, even though it may not respond to
socialist changes," he added.

Fidel Castro said he believes socialism will come sooner or later, but "we
must be realistic. Changes such as those of the Cuban revolution are not in
sight in Latin America. But there are changes in the sense of greater
independence with respect to the United States, greater national awareness,
a greater disposition to defend natural resources and a greater
understanding of what imperialism is and a willingness to confront that
imperialism..."

The struggle of the Panamanian people to recover sovereignty over the canal
is very positive. The political and structural changes that have taken
place in Peru are very positive. The current position of the Venezuelan
Government and its objective of nationalizing its iron and oil are of great
importance..." the Cuban Prime Minister also said. He praised the
international policy of Mexican President Luis Echeverria, whom he said was
the most progressive chief of state Mexico has had since Gen Lazaro
Cardenas, and the most friendly toward Cuba.

He admitted that the overthrow of the Chilean Popular Unity government was
a sethack for the Latin American revolutionary movement and a victory for
U.S. imperialism. "But it will be a costly one," Castro warned.

He said he was convinced that the Soviet-Chinese differences have no
objective foundation. "I believe subjective factors are an influence," he
added. "There are not two socialisms, there is only one socialism. There is
only one scientific doctrine, which is Marxism- Leninism. The others are
inventions somewhat influenced by the prejudice and fear that capitalist
propaganda has tried to sow with regard to socialism."

At the end of the press conference, Fidel Castro confirmed that Cuba is
about to approve its political constitution and call for general elections
(1976). When asked if he will be a candidate, Castro replied: "here, nobody
is a candidate, because that belongs to the other world: the capitalist
world, the bourgeois world. I have my job and duties, and I shall be
whatever the party decides. I really do not aspire to any post..."
