FIDEL RECEIVES DRAFT CONSTITUTION, LAUDS CONTENT

Havana Domestic Services in Spanish 1030 GMT 25 Feb 75 FL

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, PCC Central Committee first
secretary and revolutionary government prime minister, yesterday received
at Revolution Palace the draft constitution prepared by a PCC-government
commission.

We are deeply gratified that this commission has completed its task on
schedule, and we can even say that it overfulfilled its task, Fidel said.
He added: We are going to remind you that the party-government commission
which worked on the draft constitution was formed by official agreement on
22 October 1974 under the chairmanship of Central Committee Secretariat
Member Blas Roca.

Fidel stressed it is truly a historic event that the draft constitution was
completed on the 80th anniversary of the Baire independence cry. He termed
the draft as a constitution worthy of this generation, adding: It is
written in very simple and clear terms. It contains very beautiful concepts
and quite revolutionary idea.

Fidel said: One thing that concerns us and which must be of constant
concern is that the laws we make, the constitution we write must be
vigorously enforced. After recalling that the characteristics of bourgeois
constitutions are that they are proclaimed and agreed upon, and then many
of their concepts are not fulfilled, Fidel stressed: The revolution cannot
create a constitution, cannot create institutions and cannot create
principles that are not fulfilled.

Thanks Roca Commission

Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1132 GMT 25 Feb 75 FL

[Excerpts] Fidel said: Our people will feel proud when this constitution is
discussed. The revolution will have taken a historic step toward
institutionalization and an end to the provisional character of the
revolutionary government. He added: I am certain all those interested in
the institutionalization of the Cuban Revolution, and all who are
interested in matters of public law and political law throughout the
underdeveloped world, especially in Latin America, are going to find a
great stimulation. Referring to the commission work, Fidel said there has
been little noise and much work. He reaffirmed his gratification for having
received the draft constitution. He added: We will devote ourselves to the
task of studying it more in depth, first, to understand it well and,
second, because it will be a fundamental duty of all revolutionary leaders
to know and apply the socialist constitution. Fidel concluded by stressing:
I tell you honestly and sincerely that you have done good work in a short
time and that you have responded to the trust the party had in you, and
this trust has been fully justified. We were also certain before hand that
it would be a good draft constitution. We congratulate you for the work you
have completed.
