FIDEL SPEAKS AT FINAL SESSION OF CDR NATIONAL PLENUM

Havana Domestic Television Service in Spanish 1800 GMT 21 Feb 75 FL

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, PCC Central Committee first
secretary and Revolutionary Government prime minister, has attended the
final working sessions of the CDR National Plenum along with Osvaldo
Dorticos, president of the republic and Politburo member. Their arrival was
received by the delegates with profound demonstrations of joy. Fidel
arrived in the company of Central Committee Members Jesus Montane and Jose
Alberto Naranjo.

During the evening session, CDR National Coordinator Jorge Lazcano
presented Fidel with an identification card during a symbolic ceremony.
Fidel also received a framed emblem of the first PCC Congress from the CDR
Oriente Province directorate.

Others present at the presiding table included Jose Ramirez Cruz, central
committee member and president of the ANAP [National Association of Small
Farmers]; Justice Minister Armando Torres Santrayl; Orlando Fundora, chief
of the Central Committee's revolutionary orientation department--DOR;
Interior Vice Minister Haydee Diaz, and other leaders.

Speaking during the final session to participants in the CDR National
Plenum, Fidel pointed out that the mass organizations have converted each
Cuban into a revolutionary militant, and that the CDR have been faithfully
fulfilling all the tasks assigned to them. Referring to education and
public health, Fidel said that in a few years our education and public
health systems will be among the most advance in the world. He asserted
that in coming years we will have attained achievements superior to those
reached so far.

Fidel also pointed out that the CDR have the tasks of improving the quality
of their work in all fronts.

At the conclusion of last night's session, Fidel had a lively talk with
some of the delegates who participated in the plenum. He also extended his
greeting to them. Fidel also congratulated the CDR members for the
successes attained by their organization and he urged them to improve
constantly.

The afternoon session had been presided over by President Dorticos who
addressed the 263 delegates. He explained the projections of economic
development that the country is planning for the 1976-80 5-year period.
Dorticos also said that by drafting and putting into practice the first
5-year plan for the national economy, we are not only reaching a superior
level of economic management in the country but we are also beginning a
superior development phase of the structure and socialist dynamics of the
Cuban economy and society. He also pointed we are progressing in quality
along the historic, victorious and satisfying paths of socialism.
