FIDEL CASTRO STATEMENT ON OCTOBER REVOLUTION ANNIVERSARY

FL060042Y Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 0000 GMT 6 Nov 77 FL

[Text] In a statement to (Nikolai Spirius), TASS correspondent in Havana,
commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of the PCC Central
Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers, has
commented on the 60th anniversary of the October Revolution.  In his
statement, Fidel said:  During all times and eras, the peoples have
commemorated important dates marking great events and, today, all countries
and peoples have their own national commemorations.  But the date marking
the triumph of the Glorious October Socialist Revolution, which was carried
out by Russia's working class under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party,
headed by the great Lenin, is a special commemoration with world historic
significance.  It is the greatest commemoration of all peoples.  Fidel
added:  I would like to stress the immense importance of the CPSU Central
Committee's policy, of its Politburo and, especially, of our beloved
comrade Leonid Brezhnev in the unchangeable continuity of the Leninist
direction.  The peoples of the world today have profound faith in the CPSU,
which practices a scientifically fundamental domestic and foreign policy.
About the successes of its domestic policy, one can say that statistics are
the best demonstration.  They reflect the magnificent gains made by the
USSR in recent years.

The magnificent results of its foreign policy--whose main task is to
guarantee a long-lasting and prolonged peace on earth, a policy to whose
fulfillment Leonid Brezhnev devotes his tireless energy and vigor--are also
evident.

Thanks to that, the ideas of the struggle for disarmament and peace are
gaining increased support throughout the world.

Referring to the attempts to extinguish the international communist
movement, Fidel said:  There is no type of excuse or any type of argument
which would justify extinguishing the international communist movement.
All attempts to break up this movement represent a betrayal of
Marxism-Leninism.  There have always been deserters and traitors, whether
it be of the right of left, and today also they can be found.  The treason
of the Chinese leadership is at the top due to its consequences and
significance.  It is the most serious and dangerous one, but history tells
us that traitors are irremediably condemned.
