Castro in Assembly Debate

FL261226 Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1000 GMT 26 June 81

[Excerpt] The second and final session of the first regular period of the
People's Government National Assembly for 1981 will begin early this
morning. The sessions began yesterday at the Palace of Conventions in this
capital.

Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, who participated in the opening session,
described yesterday's report on the country's educational situation as very
good because of its objectivity and fairness. Fidel took part, in his
capacity as deputy to the National Assembly, in the debate on the report
read by Education Minister Jose Ramon Fernandez during the afternoon
session. The president of the Councils of State and Ministers also said
that the assessment presented by the National Assembly's Committee of
Education and Science was beneficial. He said that based on the
recommendations proposed, the state will have to work intensively with the
support of the party and mass organizations to get rid of the deficiencies
that still exist in education. Fidel emphasized that the solution to that
problem is not only the work of the Education Ministry but also the work of
the people's government in the provinces and municipalities and of other
organs whose cooperation is required, including the people in charge of
construction work, planning and distribution.

After noting that the revolution has done a good deal in the course of all
these years in the area of education but that there is still work to be
done, Fidel stressed that raising the level of quality in education is a
wide-open field because the country already has 210,000 professors and
teachers, the latter all possessing degrees.

Concerning some matters brought out in the report on the schools in the
mountains, he said that those conditions will definitively change when the
peasants organize themselves into cooperatives, he stressed that this
should serve as a stimulus to foster the organization of cooperatives in
those areas, which would help solve their socioeconomic problems.

At Fidel's suggestion, the plenum decided to postpone the report on the
people's free time until the next period of sessions of the National
Assembly. He asked for a new, more detailed study.
