FIDEL CASTRO ADDRESSES SMALL FARMERS PLENUM

FL131257 Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1030 GMT 13 Feb 81

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro has noted the spirit of patriotism
and work demonstrated by the people on observance of the slogan for a
better defense and increased production in his closing remarks at the ninth
plenum of the National Committee of the National Association of Small
Farmers, ANAP, held in Guira de Melena. Fidel opened his speech by
referring to the international situation which forces us to reinforce our
defense. He added that no time is being wasted inasmuch as we are
organizing and arming ourselves very rapidly. But, because of this, we are
not going to neglect production, he stressed. We will not neglect the
effort for creative work and the country's development.

The first secretary of the PCC asserted that one example of the spirit of
work displayed by the people is the present sugar harvest. We are carrying
out the most efficient harvest of the revolution's history, according to
the grinding reports filed by the sugar mills. He stated that he is sure
that by 30 April all the sugarcane scheduled for grinding will have been
processed, or more than the sugarcane scheduled in the grinding program. He
expressed satisfaction because this harvest demonstrates that socialism is
capable of harvest achievements superior to those of the past, because the
capitalists were never able to grind stably above 90 [percent]. The
commander in chief further stated that the progress of this harvest makes
one feel optimistic when evaluating the future possibilities of the sugar
industry. He then referred to the efforts made in the great spring cane
planting which includes nearly 30,000 caballerias throughout the country.
He noted the work of the operators of agricultural machinery, and said the
aim is to have all the soil plowed by 30 April, an activity which is being
carried out at a good pace. He made special mention of the sugar industry's
goals for the first 6 months of this year, stressing that they are very
significant for the branch's 5-year period.

Sitting on the dias of the ANAP plenum were PCC Politburo members Jose
Ramon Machado Ventura and Arnaldo Milian and secretariat member Julian
Rizo. The plenum examined the peasants' work during 1980 which Jose Ramirez
Cruz, alternate member of the PCC Politburo and ANAP president, termed
positive.
