REPORT ON SECOND DAY OF ANPP MEETING IN HAVANA

FL221610 Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1100 GMT 22 Dec 83

[Text] The second day of the fifth regular session of the second meeting of
People's Government National Assembly [ANPP] is scheduled to discuss and
approve the proposed 1984 economic and social development plan and a report
on the international activity of the ANPP. The financial reports of the
Council of Ministers and of the City of Havana People's Government
Provincial Assembly on their activities for this year will also be
discussed today.

At the opening session of the ANPP, at which Commander in Chief Fidel
Castro, first secretary of the party, was present, the decree laws on
national symbols and the construction, preservation, and protection of
roads were discussed. The ANPP also heard the Communications Ministry's
report read before the plenum by Communications Minister Pedro Guelmes.
Commander in Chief Fidel Castro expressed his opinion of the Communications
Ministry's report in the following words:

[Begin Castro recording] It seems to me that the report is very well done.
It presents all of the accomplishments, of which there are quite a few.
Among them, I believe that the possibility for direct communications
between the cities and the capitals is revolutionary, and soon will have it
between Havana and the rest of the country.

The Communications Ministry is not as it was in the past. Today it is
concerned with problems of television and radio, mail distribution,
assistance, and the charging of pensioners. They have an infinity of tasks.
They are very great. However, [Castro changes thought] Moreover, the report
not only reflects the successes, but it is also very critical. It very
clearly points out all ifs deficiencies and problems.

The report also points out -- it has 20 points, 20 recommendations. The
various comrades have spoken about various problems here which cause
concern, because communications seem to have all these problems, which are
very common. All this about telegrams, program scheduled, mail, the time it
arrives, telephones; thus, there is a high incidence of these problems and
it is reflected here.

This plan points out the various problems. Evidently there are problems,
one of which Guelmes' report points out, is related to the fact that they
are charging the wrong people for long-distance telephone calls. Well,
those are mistakes. I imagine a citizen or a family is furious when it is
mistakenly charged 20 or 30 pesos for a long-distance telephone call.

Subjective factors were mentioned here, and it seems to me that [possibly
PRELA correspondent Felix] Alvisu intended to point out some problems
against which we still have to struggle to improve this service, as they
are struggling in all fields, in the food industry, tourism,
transportation, wherever, for better treatment, for a better job, for
better service. We have to struggle hard.

I mean communications is very important for the service it lends, service
of all kinds: The system arriving ...[Castro changes thought] the radio
station arrives in Trinidad or in the southern Sierra Maestra or any place.
And television is seen. This entire matter of communications is very
important for the people and also for the state -- communications.

However, it is necessary to say that the ministry as well as the workers
have made a great effort, because they ...[Castro changes thought] It is a
modest ministry and a modest minister. [end recording]
