HAVANA REPORTS CASTRO'S 2D MESSAGE TO BETANCUR

PA022010 Havana International Service in Spanish 1600 GMT 2 Dec 83

[Text] Cuban leader Fidel Castro has told Colombian President Belisario
Betancur that the style of language used by the kidnappers of his brother,
Jaime Betancur, is not that of the varied revolutionary organizations that
have emerged in the last 25 years.

In a second note to the Colombia president, Castro refers to a message
released by the kidnappers, stressing his suspicion that the document in
question might be fake or that other elements may be involved in or
influencing these developments.  According to the Cuban president, no
revolutionary group openly expresses support for the Cuban revolution's
views.  This message is even stranger coming as it does in the wake of
strong criticisms by our country.

Castro asserts in his message to Betancur that Cuba is not honored and
could never feel honored by the support of those who carry out such
actions, devoid of all ethics and of the most elemental political sense.

The Cuban leader then warns of the possibility that other forces with other
motivations might be influencing these developments, either directly or
indirectly, through their infiltration of some organization regarding
itself as revolutionary.

Castro stresses that these developments may conceal a large-scale
provocation against the policy of peace, independence, and dignity adopted
by Columbia under Betancur's presidency.  Examples of this policy are this
country's joining the Nonaligned Movement, its outstanding participation in
the Contadora Group, and its stand and efforts in the wake of the invasion
of Grenada.

The message adds that this possibility is to be denounced and warned
against for its truly reactionary and negative nature, both for Columbia
and the progressive and revolutionary movement of Latin America and the
Caribbean.  For our part, Castro asserts, we are currently doing and will
continue to do anything within our means, through all our channels, on
behalf of the life and integrity of your brother, Jaime Betancur.

Finally, the leader of the Cuban revolution states that his revolutionary
appeal can reach only those who are inspired by just ideas and principles
and that he does not hesitate to assume historic responsibility of asking
the perpetrators of this kidnapping to make amends, as this would not
dishonor them but on the contrary might even exalt them.

Fidel's message to Betancur concluded by saying that it would be truly
irreparable to carry this errors to its final consequence.
