LD072344 East Berlin ADN International Service in German 1835 GMT 7 Dec 84

[Text] Havana, 7 Dec (ADN) -- Fidel Castro, first secretary of the
Communist Party of Cuba [PCC] Central Committee and chairman of the State
Council and the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cuba, received in
Havana today for a friendly talk Horst Dohlus, the head of the delegation
of the SED Central Committee which is staying in Cuba. Dohlus is a member
of the Polithuro and secretary of the Central Committee. Horst Dohlus
conveyed to the leading representative of socialist Cuba the cordial
greetings of Erich Honecker, general secretary of the SED Central Committee
and chairman of the GDR State Council. The greetings were equally cordially
reciprocated by Fidel Castro.

In an exchange of views, Horst Dohlus reported that the GDR's working
people have contributed high-production performances to mark the GDR's 35th
anniversary to a significant extent to strengthening socialism and
consolidating peace. This is all the more important because the
international situation continues to be made extremely tense as a result of
the dangerous policy of the most reactionary circles of U.S. imperialism
and its allies.

The GDR, in close alliance with the USSR and the other countries of the
socialist community of states, is making an active contribution to averting
the danger of war created by the confrontation and arms escalation policy
of the United States.

Horst Dohlus said that it is being made clear in many initiatives by the
working people reacting to the decision to convene the 11th SED congress
for April 1986 that they will prepare for the congress with new, top
performances to strengthen their socialist fatherland.

Fidel Castro expressed thanks for the information and said that the people
of Cuba are mobilizing all their efforts in order to make a significant
contribution in 1985 in preparation for the third PCC congress. The results
of the recent national energy conference were of great significance for
socialist Cuba's planned economic development.

At the same time, the PCC and all the people are making great efforts in
order to avert the danger to peace created by U.S. imperialist through its
aggressive activities.

In this connection the head of the SED delegation referred to Erich
Honecker's conclusion at the ninth SED Central Committee meeting to the
effect that in view of the escalated policy of intervention and threats of
the United States toward the states of Central America, the GDR attaches
particular importance to relations with the Republic of Cuba.

Fidel Castro and Horst Dohlus were in agreement in stressing that it is
more necessary than ever before to mobilize world public opinion against
the adventurist policy of the United States, as expressed in its
intervention policy toward Nicaragua, and to make an important contribution
to the preservation of world peace. The two politicians confirmed the
standpoint that the problems in the Central American region can only be
resolved through negotiations. They gave their agreement to the full
contents of the new proposals for negotiations by Konstantin Chernenko to
prevent a nuclear catastrophe, and stressed that it is now up to the United
States to react positively to this.

During the meeting, the partners in the talks expressed their satisfaction
with the high level of relations between the SED and the PCC. The two
parties are determined to develop and deepen these close and fraternal
relations.

Jose Ramon Machado, member of the Politburo and Secretariat of the PCC
Central Committee; Heinz Langer, GDR ambassador to the Republic of Cuba;
and Bruno Mahlow, deputy chief of the SED Central Committee International
Relations Department, took part in the talks.

The delegation ended its visit to the Republic of Cuba today.
