CASTRO ON TIES WITH FRG, NICARAGUAN SITUATION

DW221433 Baden-Baden Suedwestfunk Network in German 1925 GMT 19 Oct 84

[President Fidel Castro interviewed by correspondent in Fraessler in Cuba;
date not given, in Spanish with superimposed German translation --
recorded]

[Excerpts] [Fraessler] How do you assess Willy Brand's visit to Cuba and
what can you tell us about German-Cuban relations in general?

[Castro] First of all, I would like to express to the FRG people my
friendly feelings and our satisfaction to have received this delegation
headed by such a famous, serious, and extremely prudent man as Willy
Brandt. The opportunity to exchange views with him was extraordinarily
valuable, useful, and positive for us. I believe that it would be
appropriate for the FRG Germans and the Cubans to strengthen their mutual
contacts. Doing this would be useful because we have to struggle for a
common cause peace, which is indispensable for Germans, Cubans, and the
entire world.

During our history, we have cooperated with many Germans, and we are doing
so now with Germans from the FRG as well as from the GDR with which we have
maintained extensive relations for decades. We hold in esteem and respect
and admire the German people because of their cultural, scientific, and
philosophical achievements.

[Fraessler] What is your opinion of Nicaragua?

[Castro] On the whole, I can say that the situation in Nicaragua is quite
complex. We are currently experiencing a situation in which the people are
facing extreme difficulties resulting from U.S. intervention, hostility,
and aggression. However we are also aware that they are a valiant and
united people who are prepared to cope with these difficulties and to march
ahead. We trust that the revolution will defend itself, survive, and
ultimately achieve a triumphant victory despite the threat. We have full
confidence in the revolution and in the People of Nicaragua. However, the
country cannot handle all this by itself. Nicaragua needs international
support; it needs the aid of West Europe and the German people.
