Castro Addresses Meeting

FL161315 Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1145 GMT 16 Jan 85

[Text] Fidel participated in the closing ceremony of the national party
meeting on economic efficiency.

[Begin Castro recording] At the closure of the National Assembly meeting,
although our main effort had been related to the conservation of fuel and
raw materials, I mentioned the problem of human resources.  I said this
problem was not so urgent, that is, that the access to investment had
priority, everything [words indistinct] could be put into practice
immediately, but the problem of human resources would take years to solve.
We had a job to do: We did not want to leave anyone unemployed.  It is not
a question of hurrying now to reduce excess personnel everywhere because I
have the impression we would have to let a lot of people go, and we do not
want to do that.  We want to do it with the passage of time.  We want to
optimize, rationalize, and properly use our human resources. [end
recording]

Our Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of the party's Central
Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers,
participated in the closure of the national party meeting on efficiency in
budgeted activities.  Fidel also referred to the need to make rational use
of human resources because these resources are the most important.  Then he
said that when socialist production norms and formulas began to be applied
to the workers, greater productivity began to be observed in many different
types of work.  He cited the example of the progress achieved in
canecutting.

[Begin recording] In 1970, 350,000 canecutters were required, and this
number was required every year to produce 6 million tons of sugar; Camaguey
Province alone -- when it was a single province, prior to the
politico-administrative division -- needed 70,000 or 80,000 canecutters, if
I remember correctly.  I know that tens of thousands of workers from all
over Cuba had to go to Camguey.  But now that province is reaching the
point where it can carry out the sugar harvest with its own work force.
Nationwide, there has been a reduction from 350,000 to less than 80,000.
[end recording]

He then referred to other activities in which economic resources are
invested that may appear to be wasted but are not.  He cited the example of
the need to train teachers and physicians.

[Begin recording] The citizen should have medical attention available to
him where he is.  If he is in a campground or in a hotel taking a vacation
or on a merchant ship bound for Japan, he needs a doctor.  Our citizens
[words indistinct] because we have to multiply.  The child at school needs
a doctor, persons at home need doctors.  Wherever there are people, doctors
are needed.  The goal of medicine is to provide medical care to the
citizen, maintain and keep watch over his health, wherever he may be.  This
concept is really a very revolutionary concept. [end recording]

Commander in Chief Fidel Castro also referred to the need to optimize [the
use of] human resources, especially in some areas such as the capital where
defense needs are greater, there is more work and a greater number of
public services, and the shortage of human resources is noted.

[Begin recording] It is necessary to rationalize and optimize the use of
our resources, we must save. [Words indistinct] Now we have to dig in, and
keep the evil from spreading. [end recording]

Finally, Fidel called upon party members, labor unions, and the mass
organizations to be attentive and determine how much each unit consumes,
and take part in the economic struggle, the conservation effort.

[Begin recording] I know the studies were critical and self-critical, in
this entire process; that is, there is a beginning of awareness.  Let us
begin to struggle, let us get started, let us get ready to fight another
battle.  I am absolutely convinced we will win it [end recording]
