ANPP Approves Balance of 1986 Budget
FL022009 Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish
1700 GMT 30 Sep 87

[Text] The recently discussed, and approved, balance of the 1986 budget by
the National Assembly of the People's Government [ANPP], has given us
something to think about.  It is well known that the sustained drop in the
price of oil on the international market and the effects of the devaluation
of the dollar, have resulted in certain limitations to the availability of
freely convertible currency and that this has had its effects on our
productive capacity.  These problems resulted in the need to adjust our
economic growth, and they are the reason why we did not achieve the levels
of efficiency established for 1986.

Nevertheless, and despite the problems, we have witnessed our government's
determination to continue providing the basic services our people need and
to continue building houses, schools, day care centers, and hospitals.

Unfortunately, there are also important factors that affect the efficiency
of the productive enterprises.  This is mainly because there is poor
control in the use of our material resources and their productivity.  For
example, we are still experiencing problems in the charge and delivery of
our merchandise; the dining room and cafeteria systems reported losses
above the estimated losses; we have problems involving quality; undue
buildup of inventories; violations in the use of electricity; violations
involving prices and financial discipline; and shortage of funds.  But,
there is also a positive side to this problem.  Our planned activities
reported positive results.  A stronger discipline was used when calculating
our resources, and our spending was curbed.

Likewise, the provinces and ministries improved their systems to verify the
credit standing and financial situation of the state enterprises.  This
system has improved the economic administration of these enterprises.  To
sum it all up, and like our commander in chief said: our society can only
become a more just society in the measure that it becomes more efficient.
