CASTRO DISCUSES L.A. CP CONFERENCE RESULTS

Moscow TASS in English 0710 GMT Aug 75 LD

[Text] Havana, August 5, TASS--"Latin American communists are unanimous in
the view that relaxation and successes in the struggle for peace that are a
result of the changes in the alignment of forces in the world in favor of
socialism, promote strengthening of all the revolutionary and progressive
forces," said Fidel Castro, the first secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of Cuba, prime minister of the Cuban Government.  In an
interview to a TASS correspondent, he dwelt at length on the results of the
conference of communist parties of countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean which was held here in June.

The conference proved, Fidel Castro said, that the communist parties of the
Western hemisphere present a united, homogeneous political force.  There is
a firm identity of views of these parties on all the problems common to
them and complete mutual understanding on specific problems faced by every
Latin American country.

The declaration adopted by the conference analyzes the international
situation, stresses the role of the Soviet Union and the socialist
community as a whole in the struggle for peace and international relaxation
and points to a great importance of the forces of socialism and successes
in international relaxation for the international revolutionary movement,
Fidel Castro said.

"Representatives of practically all parties of Latin American countries in
their speeches at the conference expressed concern about negative
consequences of the foreign policy of China for the international situation
as a whole and for the situation in each of these countries and about
negative, pseudorevolutionary, obstructionist and splitting nature of that
policy, since that policy is a significant factor, but a factor that has a
negative effect on the revolutionary process.  This problem was analyzed at
the conference, and its participants, as the declaration stresses,
condemned the foreign policy of the Chinese leadership," Fidel Castro said.

The Havana conference, said the leader of the Cuban communists, declared
for a convocation of an international conference of communist and workers
parties and for achieving favorable conditions for holding such a
conference.

Fidel Castro stressed the importance of the provisions in the declaration
about the need of all-around widening of solidarity with the revolutionary
movements of various countries, with the revolutionary movements of various
countries, with the communist parties, and of the strengthening of
internationalist proletarian solidarity as a whole.

"The ideas expressed in the declaration will promote further development
and strengthening of relations between communist parties of Latin America
and will exert a great influence on the international communist movement,"
Fidel Castro declared
