Castro-Chebrikov Meeting

PM301345 Moscow PRAVDA in Russian 30 Mar First Edition p 5

[TASS report:  "Visit to Cuba"]

[Text] Havana, 29 Mar -- V.M. Chebrikov, member of the CPSU Central
Committee Polituburo and chairman the USSR Committee for State Security,
who is on an official friendly visit here, has met with Fidel Castro, first
secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba [PCC] Central Committee and
president of the Councils of State and of Ministers. Taking part in talks
were Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, member of the PCC Central Committee Polithuro
and vice president of the Councils of State and of Ministers; Jose Ramon
Machado Ventura, member of the PCC Central Committee Polithuro and
Secretariat; Jorge Risquet, member of the PCC Central Committee Polithuro
and Secretariat; and Division General Jose Abrahantes, member of the PCC
Central Committee and minister of the interior.

V.M. Chebrikov conveyed cordial greetings and best wishes to Fidel Castro
and the entire Cuban leadership from M.S. Gorbachev, general secretary of
the CPSU Central Committee, and other Soviet leaders. In turn, Fidel Castro
expressed sincere appreciation for the attention and warm words. He asked
that fraternal greetings be conveyed to M.S. Gorbachev, the CPSU Central
Committee, the Soviet Government, and the entire Soviet people.

Fidel Castro spoke about the work which is under way in Cuba to implement
the decisions of the Third PCC Congress aimed at improving socialist
production and social relations and introducing effective forms and methods
of accelerating socialist building. On behalf of the Soviet leadership V.M.
Chebrikov wished the Communists and all socialist Cuba's working people the
successful implementation of their plans.

V.M Chebrikov reported on the first results of the implementation in the
USSR of the decisions of the 27th CPSU Congress and about the progress of
the process of restructuring and renewal in various spheres of Soviet
society's life. The special importance for the work of Communists and the
entire Soviet people of the the CPSU Central Committee January (1987)
Plenum, which defined restructuring and cadre policy tasks at the present
stage of socialist building with a view to fully reveal the inexhaustible
potential of socialism, was emphasized. Fidel Castro spoke highly of the
decisions of the CPSU Central Committee January Plenum and wished Soviet
Communists and all the Soviet working people success in the swift
implementation of those decisions.

A.S. Kapto, Soviet ambassador to the Republic of Cuba, was present at the
meeting.

On the same day V.M. Chebrikov laid a wreath at the monument to Jose Marti,
the Cuban people's national hero.
