Closes Association Meeting

FL150255 Havana Television Service in Spanish 0100 GMT 14 Mar 88

[Remarks by President Fidel Castro at the closing of the second working
session of the National Council of the Saiz Brothers Association of Young
Writers and Artists held at Havana's Palace of Conventions on 13
March--recorded]

[Excerpts] Everything did not go smoothly all the time; it was impossible
for everything to go smoothly all the time. There were some family
disagreements during this meeting but they helped it give an open, candid,
sincere, and spontaneous character. Many things were said at the meeting
[words indistinct]. In my opinion, they are a source of true promise for
our country. On this matter, let me share with you something I have been
noticing in our country, no matter how dissatisfied we may be. I see many
positive things in our people, many. I see many positive things in our
youth. I do not know what loneliness is. When one can share with the
people--and I try to share as much as possible--it is the antithesis of
loneliness. In that sense, I feel the most accompanied man in the world.
[passage omitted]

I believe we need to have courage and even take new roads. Someone said we
might make mistakes. We can say: Yes, we might make some mistakes but we
can have everything here. I remember that when I mentioned the matter of
striving for the highest spirit of criticism, we said it is better to have
the inconveniences, the mistakes, resulting from criticism than the
inconvenience of an absence of criticism. I could say it is better to have
mistakes resulting from too much freedom than the mistakes or
inconveniences associated with having no freedom at all. [applause]
[passage omitted]

I believe that we have won a prize with the confidence we have in the
people when we see all those things. I tell you that I see them every day;
I see them everywhere. Nobody tells me. I do not read them in reports; I
see them. I talk to the people; I like to talk to the people.

I suggest we start working right after this meeting.
