CASTRO PRESIDES OVER BREEDING FARM ANNIVERSARY

FL291856 Havana Domestic Service in Spanish 1045 GMT 29 May 84

[Text] At a ceremony held yesterday afternoon to commemorate the 20th
anniversary of the Los Naranjos Livestock Breeding Enterprise, Commander in
Chief Fidel Castro called upon all Cubans to further develop Cuba's cattle
industry. The opening speech was made by Jose Gonzalez Torres, alternate
Politburo member [as heard], and director of the enterprise.

[Begin Gonzalez recording] Comrade Fidel has worked many hours at the Los
Naranjos Enterprise. His ideas have had a permanent effect over the last 20
years. Many times Fidel has directed the work which included acquisition and
development of tropical Holstein cattle, soil conservation, and implementation
of policies on the rotation of pastures. Under Fidel's knowledgeable and planned
direction the enterprise now has more than 23,000 head of cattle, produces 100
times more milk than it originally produced, and has given Cuba's artifical
insemination centers more than 1,000 young bulls of the highest genetic quality.
These achievements result from the correct application of policies, resources
investment and development, and the unselfish work of men and women. All these
factors have contributed in a decisive way to the formation of this
revolutionary project. History should record the efforts our commander has made
to develop this resource for Cuba.

We could cite innumerable examples of Fidel's personal efforts in developing
Cuba's genetic studies. There are many projects which have counted on his
presence to further their work. He has devoted many hours of work to the Los
Naranjos Enterprise. Suffice it to say that when the Los Naranjos project
started, he would visit us at any time of night or day to explain what should be
done. That is why we can justifiably say that the founder of Cuba's genetic
studies and our enterprise, and the most active worker in this field has been
our beloved commander in chief. [end recording]

Jose Gonzalez Torres presented Fidel Castro with a certificate bestowing on him
the distinction of Founder of Los Naranjos and a book on the work performed at
this enterprise over the past 20 years.

After the presentation, Luis Simeon Salinas, second secretary of the National
Agricultural and Livestock Workers Union [SNTA], read the resolution designating
the Los Naranjos project model enterprise for 3 consecutive years, and also
candidate standard-bearer of model units. Fidel personally presented the awards
to Jose Gonzalez Torres.

Minister of Agriculture Adolfo Diaz summarized the ceremony and recalled how the
revolution, through the Agrarian Reform Law and the deep and rapid reforms which
the law brought about in Cuba, made it possible for this enterprise to he
successful.

[Begin Diaz recording] Today, along with Los Naranjos workers, we have present
here the Agriculture Ministry delegates from all provinces and the 127 directors
of Cuba's cattle enterprises.

Everyone present at this ceremony has come not only to express with their
presence the admiration and respect felt for this work center -- standard-bearer
of our cattle industry -- but also to say that we, the country's cattlemen
filled with admiration and emotion by the colossal development effort guided,
encouraged, and carried out by you -- on behalf of all work centers they manage
and together with Los Naranjos comrades, wish, on this memorable occasion, to
pledge before you, commander in chief, that we will work without respite until
the day when we will be able to say to you: Commander in chief, the Cuban cattle
industry, for which you have worked so hard, has attained the level of
technical, productive, and economic achievement you expect from it. The Cuban
cattle industry has fulfilled its obligation to you. Until that day, commander
in chief you can be sure that we will work without respite until the job is
completed. [end recording]

Minister Adolfo Diaz said the Los Naranjos Enterprise had not yet reached the
peak of its fast-paced development, and that it will continue to develop at the
same pace as that of the revolution which created the enterprise. The enterprise
should continue to grow until it reaches a total of 32,740 head of cattle and
180 livestock buildings. Diaz added that after the investing process ends and
the project begins to grow, the enterprise should begin producing 140,000 liters
of milk daily, more than 51 million liters of milk yearly, and slaughtering more
than 2,500 fatted bulls a year.

Adolfo Diaz also talked about Cuba's general agriculture development strategy,
which Fidel Castro outlined. He said that over a 25-year period, Cuba has had
great success in its cattle development policies, Diaz emphasized that milk is a
specialized part of the cattle industry and that a large infrastructure has been
created around it. Diaz said that more than 130 cattle enterprises exist in
Cuba, including 80 dairies, 33 breeding farms, and 13 for slaughtering purposes.
He said many technical engineers and workers are assigned to this important
task, and that what had been wasteland is now used to raise cattle. Diaz
underscored that the revolution has worked toward bettering the livestock
workers' living conditions.

A few minutes before the ceremony ended, Commander in Chief Fidel Castro hailed
Los Naranjos workers.

[Begin Castro recording] I want to add a few words to what has already been said
to extend our deepest and most sincere congratulations to the workers,
technicians, cadres, and leaders of this enterprise for the work which they have
done up to this point. [end recording]

Fidel called for a greater impetus to the cattle industry and that our land be
more efficiently used to accomplish this purpose. He said that as a rule, Cuba
will continue to specialize in the production of milk, and that more meat will
also he produced because a selective policy will be applied to the dairy
industry. Fidel said that the example of writing a book about the Los Naranjos
Enterprise should be followed by other enterprises because it is a valuable
contribution. He said the goal of being a model unit, such as the Los Naranjos
Enterprise, should be followed by all of Cuba's enterprises. Fidel called for a
special effort to win the battle of cattle development.

[Begin Castro recording] Now what we must do is to be more selective of our
livestock. We must conduct genetic studies keeping in mind each location's
actual conditions. Each location is different. Some locations present more
difficulties in raising cattle because of warmer weather while others are cooler
and have better conditions for raising cattle. For this reason, I ask all
enterprise directors to pay special attention to these factors, because these
ideas and decisions have come from experience. And, experience shows us that we
must be more rigorously selective. I am sure that we will see better results.
[end recording] Fidel also said that measures should be adopted in each sector
so that the cattle industry benefits. He stressed that Cuba must make a leap in
the next few years, and this will demand a special effort.
