Castro on Rectification, Waste of Resources

FL052218 Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish 1800 GMT 5 Feb 88

[Text]  We should be careful in the application of the rectification
policy because some of its aspects will take us time; however, we must be
exacting in complying with guidelines and not allow again the invention of
formulas to flout these guidelines.  This was said by Commander in Chief
Fidel Castro in closing a meeting in Havana of the State Committee for
Labor and Social Security [CETSS].  The conferees discussed the tasks
involved in the rectification process and this year's basic goals.

Fidel spoke at length on the chaotic economic situation created by
erroneous concepts concerning the country's development.  He recalled the
serious situation certain work centers were experiencing such as the
Guanabacoa ironworks and Vanguardia Socialista, and the terrible work in
international tourism.  He talked about the generalized lack of discipline
and the need to enforce labor discipline.  Commenting on the rectification
measures underway which are bearing fruit for the party and government
policy, the commander in chief cited the model performance of the
minibrigades and the Blas Roca contingent.

Fidel was informed of the methods to guarantee the revision of norms which
generated enormous payments though most places did not produce enough or
work the established 8 hours a day.  He strongly criticized the waste of
resources because of false concepts about the organization of the economy
and because of ignorance about the value and cost of the projects, as well
as arbitrarily fixed prices to falsely show profitability where none
existed.

After learning of the CETSS' efforts to end inflated payrolls and to
rationalize tasks and resources with the introduction of multi-assignments,
Fidel recalled the overstaffing in the hospitals and the successful
struggle to reduce this personnel.  He stressed that cutting and
rearrangement of staffing will not mean that workers will become
unemployed, as was the case under capitalism, because measures are being
implemented to relocate the surplus workers.
