FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  Havana Cubavision Television Service in Spanish at 0200 GMT on 13 April
carries a 120-minute rebroadcast of Part 2 of President Fidel Castro's meeting
with representatives of evangelical groups and the Jewish community in Havana
on 2 April. This version has been compared with the Havana Cubavision Network
version published in the Cuba Section of the 13 April Latin America DAILY
REPORT, pp 3-12, allowing the following indisinct words and rewording to be
provided:

2.  Page 4, column two, paragraph one, from sentence four, reads: ...meeting
with Protestants, as they called them, Catholics, and Jews... (supplying
indistinct words)

3.  Page 4, column two, paragraph three, from sentence two reads: ...in the
countryside. That is what they were for me. Imagine this is... (supplying
indistinct words, rewording)

4.  Page 4, column two, paragraph four, from sentence one reads: ...it was
not.... [corrects himself] That is the way it was. Really I think... (supplying
indistinct words)

5.  Page 5, column one, paragraph three, from sentence two reads: ...all quite
traumatic. Everyone was affected by the fever of a revolution, extremism,...
(supplying indistinct words)

6.  Page 5, column one, paragraph four, from last sentence reads: ...an
antireligious nature, in the political sense, the revolutionary sense,
because... (supplying indistinct words)

7.  Page 5, column one, paragraph five, from sentence three reads: ...that the
Church has many poor and humble followers. That is the case in Brazil and other
countries and we had seen... (supplying indistinct passage)

8.  Page 5, column two, paragraph four, from sentence three reads: ...on the
development of this situation, that these... (supplying indistinct words)

9.  Page 6, column one, paragraph two, from last sentence reads: ...discussion
we held. [new paragraph] [Unidentified speaker] Christians and Socialism. [new
graf] [Castro] Yes. Later in Jamaica, all the talks we had had were published.
I think... (supplying indistinct words)

10.  Page 6, column two, paragraph three, from sentence two reads: ...were
present and those factors have had an...  (supplying indistinct words)

11.  Page 7, column one, paragraph two, from sentence one reads:...with Frei
Betto spread throughout the world a totally new... (supplying indistinct words)

12.  Page 7, column two, paragraph one, from sentence seven reads: ...is a
problem of principle that has to be...  (supplying indistinct words)

13.  Page 7, column two, paragraph three, from last sentence reads: ...are
militia members, who are willing to die for the country,... (supplying
indistinct words)

14.  Page 8, column one, paragraph three, from sentence two reads: ...because
one person is going to, or not going to, join the party, or whether he is
interested in taking on a responsibility or not, or... (supplying indistinct
words)

15.  Page 8, column one, paragraph three, from last sentence reads: ...are
discriminated against. He is ignored and looked upon with a certain contempt
and subjected to a cross fire, that of the enemy and that of the revolution
[applause] [new paragraph] They are... (rewording, supplying indistinct words)

16.  Page 8, column one, paragraph four, from sentence two reads: ...defend
their homeland and the people and they are willing... (supplying indistinct
words)

17.  Page 8, column one, paragraph four, from last sentence reads: ...or not.
[applause] [new graf] How can there be a separation, a division, among
ourselves, among the believers and nonbelievers. It is really absurd...
(supplying indistinct words)

18.  Page 8, column one, paragraph six, from sentence one reads: ...is the
reason. That is the reason for all those problems there may... (supplying
indistinct words)

19.  Page 8, column one, paragraph six, from sentence four reads: ...have
repaired churches. We cannot imagine a city without temples, or this or that.
In other words, this not only creates a void in the need of the believers, it
also creates a void in culture; it almost creates a void in urban life if we
were to build towns without a single temple.  [new graf] Well, all that...
(supplying indistinct words, rewording)

20.  Page 8, column two, paragraph one, from sentence two reads: ...but
[repeats himself]--yes, yes--that comes out... (supplying indistinct words)

21.  Page 8, column two, paragraph two, from sentence four reads: ...I would
say that you have earned twice as much merit, like those who greeted me in
Brazil. Despite that and... (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

22.  Page 8, column two, paragraph two, from sentence five reads: ...admit that
there is a discriminatory situation, give us support... (supplying indistinct
word)

23.  Page 8, column two, paragraph two, from penultimate sentence reads: ...I
am sure that when those over there perceive that this problem will be resolved
here, they will be happy. They will be very happy and they will even feel they
have made a contribution, because every little bit helps. [new graf) That
meeting that was held with them present will surely be an important
contribution, because it coincided with this whole local situation...
(supplying indistinct words, rewording)

24.  Page 8, column two, paragraph three, from sentence six reads: ...the
destiny of that socialism. And obviously,...  (supplying indistinct word)

25.  Page 8, column two, paragraph three, from penultimate sentence reads:
...this garbage capitalism for 500 years, it would be... (supplying indistinct
words)

26.  Page 9, column one, paragraph two, from sentence two reads: ...money based
on that. It is a complete disaster...  (supplying indistinct word)

27.  Page 9, column one, paragraph three, from sentence two reads: ...positive
economic rates. They grew so much, they have so much, they have sold the entire
country.  They have been a privileged country, and they have received more
credits than anyone else. Well, last year...  (supplying indistinct words,
rewording)

28.  Page 9, column one, paragraph three, from sentence four reads: ...works
than Chile. Now, because of ferocious repression, workers cannot protest.
Workers cannot demand... (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

29.  Page 10, column one, first incomplete paragraph, from sentence one reads:
...inflated personnel rosters until we can deflate them. It would probably be
more useful...  (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

30.  Page 10, column one, paragraph one, from sentence four reads: ...there and
then there are problems when a road needs to be built on one of those hills.
The cities are full of those... (supplying indistinct words)

31.  Page 10, column one, paragraph one, from penultimate sentence reads:
...manner. The streets later have to be built in circles because they cannot
cross at this or at that point. New York, amid... [changes thought] [laughter]
You can see the New York skyscrapers. Sao Paulo is a city with skyscrapers and
avenues that are comparable to those in New York, but who invented all that for
our poor Third World countries? [new graf] Gentlemen, they... (supplying
missing words from break in reception)

32.  Page 10, column one, paragraph three, from sentence nine reads: ...I gave
them the example of what they are still taking out every year. They have gained
more...  (supplying words indistinct, rewording)

33.  Page 10, column one, paragraph three, from last sentence reads: ...of
their gains we would have to subtract...[changes thought] There is no future.
There really is no future for them, and no one knows what the final outcome
will be. [new graf] Now I am closely following everyday in all news reports how
they are fighting inflation... (supplying missing words from break in
reception)

34.  Page 10, column two, first incomplete paragraph, from last sentence reads:
...needs 10,000 teachers, it can have those 10,000 teachers when inflation
appears, because...  (supplying missing words from break in reception)

35.  Page 10, column two, paragraph three, from sentence five reads:
...opportunities to women, but it is essential that she has it. It is
unavoidable... (supplying indistinct words)

36.  Page 10, column two, paragraph three, from sentence eight reads: ...not
want it. I noticed they were amazed with the things I told them when I returned
from the meetings, and I mentioned a... (supplying indistinct words)

37.  Page 10, column two, paragraph three, from penultimate sentence reads:
...and has to work because life imposes it on them? Many of them... (supplying
indistinct words, rewording)

38.  Page 11, column one, paragraph one, from sentence five reads: ...such as
Venezuela, which receives who knows how many billions [currency not specified]
from the oil they sell. The city is surrounded... (supplying indistinct words,
rewording)

39.  Page 11, column one, paragraph four, from sentence one reads: ...how they
can find technical solutions to those...  (supplying indistinct word)

40.  Page 11, column one, paragraph seven, from sentence two reads: ...not a
sectarian but during that period I was able... (deleting editorial notation)

41.  Page 11, column two, from sentence one reads: ...trend opposite to this,
those who do not want this to occur say there will be an (?apocalypse). In that
case, life would be in contradiction... (supplying indistinct words)

42.  Page 12, column one, paragraph two, from sentence five reads: ...be one
who has read so many things from books, texts from abroad [crowd laughs]...
(supplying indistinct words)

43.  Page 12, column one, from sentence one reads: ...lack of understanding. So
we gain and we all gain a lot, and you can be sure that many people will be
happy because amid all those norms, rules, worries, and prejudice......
(supplying indistinct words, rewording)

44.  Page 12, column one, from sentence two reads: ...were lying down. Their
health was not good. They had a number of saints... (supplying indistinct
words)
