FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  Havana Cubavision Television in Spanish at 0028 GMT on 30 September carries
the speech by President Fidel Castro during the ceremony to mark the 30th
anniversary of the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDR) held at
the Karl Marx Theater in Havana on 28 September.

2.  This version has been compared with the Havana Domestic Radio and
Television Services version published in the 1 October issue of the Latin
America DAILY REPORT pages 1-16 and found to be identical, except for the
following:

3.  Page seven, column two, first partial paragraph, from end of second full
sentence reads: ...our fish hatcheries.  This is another important program that
we are working on... (Providing indistinct words and rephrasing).

4.  Same page, last paragraph, from end of sentence eight reads: ...same
everywhere. In Guira de Melena, a multiple crop...  (Clearing queried name).

5.  Page eight, column one, first partial paragraph, from end of fifth full
sentence reads: ...needed. In the administrative sphere [words indistinct]...
(Providing indistinct word).

6.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of last sentence reads: ...and
administrative category.

7.  This, of course, presupposes that we have been... (Providing indistinct
word, rephrasing).

8.  Same page, first full paragraph, sentence two reads: ...that all of their
vices must simply be swept aside. We are telling... (Providing indistinct word,
rephrasing).

9.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of sentence eight reads: ...percent.
[Applause] Yes. This must end once and for all, and as for those who have
reports, that is their affair. However, we will... (Providing indistinct words,
rephrasing).

10.  Same page, same paragraph, sentence eleven reads: ...to it that this
stands; where there are 100 workers, less than 20 will remain. Not only in...
(Providing indistinct words, rephrasing).

11.  Same page, same paragraph, sentence fourteen reads: ...Do you know the
amount of information that is requested of them and then requested again? We
have discussed... (Providing indistinct words, rephrasing).

12.  Same page, column two, fourth full paragraph, from end of sentence three
reads: ...replaced 300,000 cutters. With the mechanization, we have succeeded
all work we have conducted. Unfortunately, our varied-crop... (Providing
indistinct words).

13.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of sentence four reads: ...needed to
make. I believe the same thing happened in many varied-crop enterprises in
Havana and in other areas too. But if we ...(Providing indistinct words,
rephrasing).

14.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of sentence five reads: ...houses
there now. We must built between 8,000 and 10,000 houses in those enterprises
to guarantee a man's stay in those enterprises. If we want... (Providing
indistinct words, rephrasing).

15.  Page nine, column one, third full paragraph, from end of first sentence
reads: ...of courses. The Guira de Melena farming enterprise, which...
(Providing indistinct name).

16.  Same page, same paragraph, sentence three reads: ...technician, engineer,
CDR cadres [applause], and yet... (Providing indistinct word).

17.  Same page, same paragraph, same sentence reads: ...one has to work really
hard. It is not... (Providing indistinct words).

18.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of sentence five reads: ...dairy
farms. However, there are crops one cannot mechanize, because we still...
(Providing indistinct words, rephrasing).

19.  Same page, last paragraph in column one, sentence four reads: ...I say
that the question is not just to leave the office.  [applause] Offices must...
(Clearing queried passage).

20.  Same page, same paragraph, sentence five reads: ...who know, experts. I do
not see experts anywhere but working in the plaintain fields as they should. I
think of...  (Providing indistinct words, rephrasing).

21.  Same page, column two, paragraph three, first sentence reads: ...to
coincide with their children's vacation. You can therefore... (Providing
indistinct words).

22.  Same page, paragraph four, from end of sentence four reads: ...is grass.
And you see some splendid grasslands in some of those enterprises. When people
are called in, they have to cut and clean grass that is this tall.
We...(Providing indistinct words).

23.  Same page, same paragraph, last sentence reads: ...man is enough to take
care of a piece of land, then we need...  (Providing indistinct words).

24.  Same page, paragraph six, sentence two reads: ...were orders to plant a
large extension of land, taking into account... (Providing indistinct words).

25.  Same page, same paragraph, from end of sentence five reads: ...Labor Army.
But the truth is that we wasted time. When they called... (Providing indistinct
words).

26.  Page ten, column one, third full paragraph, sentence three reads: ...of
these teams were in the feedlots. And some of them... (Providing indistinct
words, rephrasing).

27.  Page twelve, column one, first partial paragraph, first partial sentence
reads: ...worked by a permanent labor force. It is a new plan resulting from
this whole new idea.

28.  We are regrouping... (Providing indistinct words, rephrasing).

29.  Same page, second full paragraph, sentence three reads: ...the road for
one-lane traffic, but not a... (Providing indistinct words).

30.  Same page, column two, second full paragraph, sentence one reads: ...in
the city. It is those types of measures that we... (Providing indistinct words,
rephrasing).

31.  Same page, sixth full paragraph, first sentence reads: ...must be prepared
to do anything, but to do reasonable things. However, companeras and...
(Providing indistinct words).

32.  Page fifteen, column two, second full paragraph, first sentence reads:
...yucca, even for the parasite. Because it is... (Providing indistinct word).
