FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Remarks by President Fidel Castro at the 27 December session of the
National Assembly of the People's Government, ANPP, at the Havana Palace of
Conventions- recorded]

2.  [Text] I was going to say, [ANPP President Juan] Escalona, that [Cuban
Workers Federation Secretary General Pedro] Ross has brought up an important
point. This concerns the Rapid Response Detachments. I say this is important
because this frightens the enemy, really. As soon as the workers began to talk
about Rapid Response Detachments and the Committees for the Defense of the
Revolution began to talk about People's Detachments, there was a campaign
against that because they are really afraid of it.  The Rapid Response
Detachments are nothing more than the people being organized, the masses
organized, to confront any attempt at counterrevolution, to confront any
counterrevolutionary disturbance.

3.  We have to support the workers in this initiative, and we have to support
the Cuban Workers Federation in this initiative of organizing the people. The
people have to be organized day and night, Saturdays and Sundays. When they are
at their work places, they have to be organized at the work places. When they
are at the schools, they have to be organized at the schools. When they are in
the community, they have to be organized in the community, simply to defend the
revolution.

4.  Because there was a time when a soft policy was adopted about this, the
people wanted to mobilize, but they were stopped. They were stopped, when the
people reacted spontaneously. This is what the enemy fears the most, because
they know that our police are not repressive.  They know that our police are
careful, restrained, and very respectful. But they are more afraid of the
masses, because the masses do not stand on ceremony or anything, and if there
has to be a clash, they will have a clash.

5.  So of course this idea immediately caused reactions and campaigns, but we
should not offer any opportunity for doubt to be introduced into these things.
Because I think, in my opinion, that this is an absolutely revolutionary
concept, and this is how we should defend ourselves from the enemy's actions in
any field.
