FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Part I of ``Fidel Castro, Present and Future of Cuba,'' a report on an
interview with President Fidel Castro by Beatriz Pages Rebollar, director of
the Mexico City weekly SIEMPRE, published in 30 May issue of SIEMPRE and
carried as a PRENSA LATINA ``exclusive'']

2.  [Text] Havana [no date as received]-Fidel Castro's watch is always 15
minutes fast: He is ahead of his time both on his wrist and in history. He is a
man of principles and convictions, of deep, universal, and infinite values;
values that are not fleeting, frivolous, perishable, or opportunistic. Although
his enemies today criticize his sense of time and weave a Dantesque black myth
around him, replete with trite and bloodthirsty anachronistic beasts, the
truth, the truth with justice and serenity, is that Castro suffers the tragedy
of a prophet. He anticipates and foresees changes in the world and divulges
them. In exchange he receives the unavoidable punishment that humanity has
always meted out to those who are ahead of their time. Fidel, as he is called
by peasants, farmers, women, children, students, doctors, lawyers, and school
teachers alike, is like a guard who observes world changes from the watch tower
of his intelligence, and understands and interprets them, not like a rustic
peasant, but with the depth, talent, wisdom and encyclopedic knowledge that is
possible only for a few privileged minds that were chosen by biology and
circumstances.

3.  SIEMPRE interviews Castro at a historic crossroads for the world and for
Cuba, at a moment when the future of socialist countries is still an open
question for international order, at a time when the survival of the Cuban
regime is a dangerous affront for the ever increasing power of the United
States. SIEMPRE comes to Cuba at a time when this nation is at work in the
scientific fields, rural areas, schools, factories, and tourist sectors to find
a way to insert a wedge into each of the doors that has been closed due to U.S.
influence and the economic weakening of the Soviet Union, which was formerly
Cuba's main export market and its trusted supplier of petroleum. The interview
took place at a time when the most powerful centers of the world decided to
hurl the Latin American nations and people on a toboggan ride through sharp and
sudden changes in which poverty, hunger, debt, and the ambition of a world
power has kept them from discerning between what is useful and what is not and
has forced their governments to give up their principles of sovereignty and
independence.

4.  In the first part of this report, Fidel Castro talks about the Americas
Initiative and the Free Trade Agreement- two U.S. economic proposals accepted
by most Latin American countries that are seen as a last hope of salvation from
regional underdevelopment. In contrast to the overflowing hopes and shining
dreams expressed by different presidents in the area, Fidel Castro disagrees
with their enthusiasm for the U.S. proposals and does so without rage or
resentment, but with the logic that accompanies a man after long years of
experience, struggle, and resistance.

5.  For the average man, bombarded by the propaganda of the international news
agencies, it is virtually impossible to comprehend the value of Cuba's survival
as a sovereign country at a time when U.S. arrogance is at a peak.  Cuba was
the first victim of interference, but now it is a symbol of Latin American
dignity. Not all of humanity's assessments over the course of history have been
just and one of the least just of all is the assessment that is currently being
made of Cuba and of Fidel Castro at this crucial time for Mexico and Latin
America.

6.  [Pages] U.S. President George Bush has proposed a Free Trade Agreement
among Mexico, the United States, and Canada and something he calls the Americas
Initiative to support the economies of the Latin American countries.  Do you
believe, Commander, that these commercial programs are the only solution to
Latin America's poverty and indebtedness? What will Latin America win or lose
if it integrates with the U.S. economy?

7.  [Castro] I believe it would lose what little political independence it has
left because the United States would act as the virtual owner of this
hemisphere. This is a major concern. I believe we would become suppliers of
cheap raw material and inexpensive labor, we would have industries with low
investment of capital per working man, we would have industries that pollute
the environment, and we would become prisoners of the technological and
industrial development of the United States.

8.  Of course, all of this-beginning with these things that are
evident-requires research and analyses to provide the basis for a factual
answer. Such studies have not been made.

9.  Would they eventually turn Latin America into some sort of Puerto Rico? Is
that the economic or political ideal of Latin America? I believe 60 percent of
the Puerto Rican people live off subsidies. What are they going to make out of
Latin America? One enormous consumer society empire, an empire of gambling,
prostitution, drugs, and vices of a consumer society?

10.  The United States has interests, not feelings. That accelerated impulse of
Bush and those initiatives comes about abruptly, almost immediately, following
the changes that took place in East Europe and the changes in the correlation
of economic forces around the world.

11.  Europe is becoming one huge economic power, and it could become even more
powerful now that it is absorbing some of the former countries of the east.
These economic powers include Germany, with its expanding borders, growing
population, and increasing wealth.

12.  Japan's economic and financial power is well known, as well as its
capacity for production and competition.

13.  [Pages] Could it then be said that the commercial treaties proposed by the
U.S. Government are an answer to the competition that power should represent to
a strengthened Europe and Japan, but also a form of coping with its economic
weakness?

14.  [Castro] Wrapped in various military adventures and an arms race, the
United States has lost much of its capacity to compete in many economic fields,
where at one time it was at the vanguard. Automobiles used to come from the
United States. Today, they come from Japan. Even the automobiles that are used
in the United States come mainly from Japan or are manufactured in the United
States by Japanese firms. The same happens with electronic equipment, domestic
appliances, the equipment of the mechanical and petrochemical industries, and
many other fields.

15.  Therefore, the United States would like to guarantee the market of 400
million Latin Amercans as a highly profitable investment market for its
capital, as a market for its products, and a source of cheap raw material and
work. Why? What is it that this capital will seek here in Latin America?
Naturally, this is not easy for them either. That is the great strategy. They
are also encountering internal resistance of a sort. The workers are worried
about the consequences for them. Labor unions and some industries are also
concerned, particularly the branches of industry that employ a large work force
and are not vanguard industries. Of course, the politicians, the large
industries, and the large monopolies will not oppose the U.S. takeover of the
Latin American market and integrate its economy into that country. I would say
that if it happens, if there is no resistance, we will even stop being Latin
Americans. I do not know what we will become: A U.S. possession? One huge
Puerto Rico?  Those are the things that worry me.

16.  Now then, when Bush spoke about the initiative, everyone praised him, but
I am not sure why they praised him. Everyone applauded without anyone knowing
why they were applauding, because I do not believe anyone has thoroughly
studied all the consequences of that problem. They have applauded in a
superficial manner, precisely because there was worldwide applause.  Later,
they began to think, and I imagine that many people are still thinking, but the
analysis of the issue has not been based on serious and thorough study of the
consequences it will entail.

17.  [Pages] Nonetheless, Latin America, particularly Mexico, have set their
hopes for development on a free trade treaty and on the Americas Initiative.

18.  [Castro] The first factor to take into consideration is that such an
initiative does not offer any solution to the region's foreign debt problem.
Between 1982 and 1990, Latin America transferred $220 billion to its creditors.
Despite that, it still has a debt amounting to $434 billion.  Therefore,
reducing by only $7 billion its official debt with the U.S. Government is
insignificant. That does not amount to even two percent of the total
accumulated debt, and the problem still remains. It is absolutely necessary to
solve that problem before even thinking about resuming Latin American economic
growth.

19.  The annual fund of $300 million proposed in the initiative to promote
capital investments in the region-of which the United States would only
contibute $100 million-is absolutely ridiculous and way below Latin America's
acummulated needs after a decade of profound economic and social crisis. This
is a region where no less than 40 percent of the population lives in poverty
and which in only three days transfers abroad $300 million to pay interest on
its foreign debt.

20.  Another important aspect to consider is the economic integration of Latin
American and Caribbean countries.  What will happen to the integration process
in face of that initiative? The U.S. proposal seeks to link those countries to
the U.S. market through bilateral agreeements. Hence, what are the
possibilities for the already limited inter-Latin American trade, which only
represents 14 percent of the region's total trade?

21.  This proposal seeks the integration of Latin American economies with the
U.S. economy, which in turn would cause the disintegration of the little
regional integration already accomplished and would prevent its future
development, which is vital for Latin America and the Caribbean.

22.  [Pages] Commander, each time U.S. trade authorities sit down to negotiate
with their Latin American counterparts about the treaty or initiative both
sides commit themselves to observe mutual reciprocity. Is this equality
possible between two economies that are so different in their composition and
strength?

23.  [Castro] The subject of reciprocity is very interesting.  How can there be
reciprocity between such unequal parties as the United States and Latin
America? Reciprocity between parties having such wide differences in their
economic development will only consolidate unequal trade, which is one of the
most brutal methods of sacking these days.

24.  It is regrettable that so far Latin America's reply to that initiative has
not even been to firmly demand partial or relative reciprocity, and the
recognition of the difference in development levels that prevents Latin America
from making commercial concessions as expeditiously as the United States. It
seems to me that this should be a basic Latin American demand in view of the
great difference in the economic development levels and because the current
U.S. foreign trade law has reinforced protectionism, preventing the entrance of
Latin American products, while at the same time the United States is demanding
free trade from the region.

25.  I am giving you an overall picture of what I believe are U.S. intentions
and the purpose behind that initiative, because there is no country on earth as
selfish as the United States, there is no country as stingy in its economic
policy, there is no country as voracious as the United States. So what can we
expect from that empire?  They are already talking about a new era of peace in
the United States, of a new U.S. world order that will last 1,000 years. We
wonder what will be our role as Latin Americans and what will be our identities
as Latin Americans in this new order the United States is dreaming of. The
answers to those questions are pending. I believe that we should meditate on,
study, and clarify these things.

26.  [Pages] Based on what you have said, however, what do you think should be
Latin America's role in facing the creation of economic blocks and above all
Latin America's possible integration to the United States?

27.  [Castro] I believe that first of all we must meditate on this seriously
and profoundly. We must come up with specific ideas on this subject because
everything is very unclear, generic, and confusing, I would say. In my opinion,
we must decide what really is best for our economies in view of the new
international situation that has been created and all those new communities
that have emerged or have been strenthened with the new correlation of economic
forces in the world. We cannot blindly support an initiative we know nothing
about. At least Mexicans have been debating and studying the matter for some
time, trying to determine what it is all about. Latin America, however, has
applauded something it really knows nothing about.

28.  [Pages] What would happen to industry, for example?

29.  [Castro] A study would have to be undertaken. What is going to happen to
each of the branches of industry? For example, one would have to see what would
happen to agriculture if the United States, with its advanced technologies and
its great scientific resources, begins to produce more wheat than anyone
else-in fact it does produce more than anyone-more soybean than anyone else,
more corn than anyone else, more chicken than anyone else, more pork than
anyone else, more milk than anyone else, and begins to ruin Latin America's
agriculture, and begins to feed all of us because it has the technology, it has
the science, it has the automation, it has the computers, it has everything, it
even has the reserve of germ plasm to develop new varieties, it has the genetic
engineering, it has absolutely all the advantages.  One would have to see, for
example, how the problem of subsidies is going to be addressed first of all. It
might be that in the agricultural sector, it will ruin all Latin America. That
is a hypothesis. Well, one must study what will happen to agriculture because
of this. One must study what will happen with the chemical industry, the
petrochemical industry, the synthetic materials, electronics, and what will
happen to each of the sectors that are basic or that are the backbone of the
economy. One must study what will happen to each of them in a hypothetical
integration of that type. I imagine the Mexicans are thinking about that.

30.  One must think about what our role will be in such an economy. Now then,
with whom are the illiterates and uneducated of Latin America going to compete?
How is the immigration going to be? If there is going to be freedom of
immigration, are the people going to be moved, are they going to come here or
go there? What industries are going to be developed here? What are they going
to leave to the current 400 million Latin Americans-who in 30 years are going
to be 800 million? I think all of that must studied in depth, as a Latin
American. I am turning away a bit from the topic of Mexico, because the
Mexicans have some experience and they already have a high level of economic
integration with the United States, in addition to the 3,000 km border they
share and the headaches that brings.

31.  Thinking about the problem as a Latin American, in that world, in that
order, in that integration, what is left to the Latin Americans? What is left
to them, what is it going to mean to them when they are separated from Japan,
Europe, and the rest of the world? What does that economic initiative they want
for all the Americas specifically mean? This has not been studied.

32.  [Pages] The problem is that in light of Latin America's great economic and
social needs, that integration seems inevitable.

33.  [Castro] What seems inevitable is that the Latin American countries will
do what the North Americans want.  They draw up the guidelines and issue the
norms about what has to be done. There is not even an united Latin American
front analyzing this. There should at least be an united front of all Latin
America analyzing the problem. The economists and scientists should explain to
us the consequences of all of this, but they should do so in a practical and
objective manner, because it is not a question of combating an idea with
slogans.

34.  [Pages] How is the Salinas de Gortari administration seen in Cuba?

35.  [Castro] It is viewed with respect. For our part, we observe with much
interest what Mexico does. This includes all those steps Mexico takes regarding
the free trade agreement, which we follow with the greatest interest, without
issuing opinions. We view it as an important event, as a new experience, and as
something that, although we do not have a right to in any way interfere in, is
of much interest to all of us. Therefore, we are following each and every
report that reaches us.

36.  We are confident in Mexico's ability to perceive everything that could be
useful and to prevent everything that could be negative. We are confident that
Mexico will do what is best for the interests of Mexico and Latin America. If I
fervently want something, it is that Mexico will never separate itself from the
rest of Latin America, that Mexico never be cut off from a dismembered Latin
America. We dream and we have a right to dream about an integrated Latin
America from Patagonia to the Rio Bravo, as Marti used to say, which is our
America.

37.  We hope that Mexico will have the necessary wisdom and sense of historic
responsibility required to come out ahead and to fulfill its duties under these
special historic circumstances of so much interest for all.

38.  [Pages] Is there any indication that Mexico is moving away from Latin
America?

39.  [Castro] No. At least Mexican officials say no. They are even saying they
will keep Europe very much in mind and that they do not want their future to
depend on a single factor. In the statements made by Mexican officials there
are no indications they are trying to move away from Latin America.

40.  The important thing here is the course of events. What will the course of
events be? What type of agreements will be reached? Where will they lead in the
future? Will the events lead to Mexico's moving away, regardless of the will of
the people? Will the evolution of events constitute an obstacle for Mexico's
integration into the rest of Latin America? The events will have the last word.
Sometimes the people want something, but the result is another.

41.  [Pages] Do you think that if Mexico agrees to include oil in the
negotiations for a free trade agreement it would be signed more rapidly?

42.  [Castro] Who is the most anxious to sign at this time?  That should be the
question. Perhaps Bush is more interested in signing than the Mexican
Government itself. I have the impression that the Mexican Government wants to
guarantee all types of possible safeguards to its interests; it does not give
the impression of being in a hurry. It seems to me that the U.S. Government is
in a greater hurry as it has even resorted to the fast track procedure, which
according to some, is the prerogative of the president to hold joint
negotiations and then ask for approval, without modification, from the
Congress. I cannot, therefore, give you an answer, but I think that if oil is
included, that would naturally make Bush happier.
