FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Report on second part of interview with President Fidel Castro by Mexico
City newspaper EL SOL DE MEXICO; place and date of interview not given]

2.  [Text] Mexico City, 3 Dec (NOTIMEX)-Cuban President Fidel Castro has
proposed that Latin American countries to form a political and economic union
to achieve development and independence.

3.  In the second part of an interview granted to a Mexican newspaper, Castro
said that the United States wants to turn Latin American countries ``into
instruments of its economic progress and political interests.''

4.  Castro stated that his proposal represents a challenge whose ``objective
and goal is genuinely great.''

5.  In his opinion, the Ibero-American countries showed signs of independence
when they held the first Ibero-American summit last July, in the western
Mexican city of Guadalajara.

6.  ``There has never been a meeting of Latin Americans convened by Latin
Americans,'' Castro stated concerning the summit, which he described as
``historic.''

7.  In addition, the Cuban president stated that before the changes in the
Soviet Union, Cuba had a ``really favorable'' commercial relationship with the
USSR, which he considered an example for the underdeveloped countries wishing
to advance.

8.  Castro claimed that the U.S. economic blockade has caused technological
difficulties in some areas of production, but they were overcome with the
importance placed on scientific research.

9.  The Cuban leader said that Latin America still has time to form an economic
bloc of world importance, given its great potential, ``instead of kneeling down
and begging that our rights and aspirations be taken into consideration.''

10.  Castro voiced his interest in establishing diplomatic relations with
European countries that have reached greater levels of development than Latin
American nations.

11.  Castro said that in Central America, there are rulers ``who are more
capable and educated, outside those corrupt and unjust governments where it was
not possible to maintain control over the economic sectors.''

12.  The Cuban president said that relations with El Salvador may change once
the definitive cease-fire agreement, which is being negotiated in Mexico City,
is signed. With respect to Nicaragua, he stated that ``relations remain
normal.''

13.  Castro described the participation of Chilean President Patricio Aylwin in
Guadalajara as ``serious and noble, reflecting decency in his statements.''
Concerning Dominican Republic President Joaquin Balaguer, Castro said that he
``made a brilliant and very refined speech.''

14.  He continued that at the present time, it is difficult to differentiate
between right or left, ``because I see many rightists behaving like leftists
and vice versa.''

15.  Castro concluded that the United States continues with its disinformation
campaign on the reality of Cuba because of its power over the media.
