FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Lazaro Barredo commentary]

2.  [Text] As I told you last week, there is a controversy in the United States
among American officials and community cliques regarding the economic more than
the political nature of the Cuban emigres. On 1 May, an old journalist, who was
a member of the regime's clan during Batista's dictatorship, commented on this
subject in a Miami newspaper. His main idea is summed up in this phrase: What
is capitalism or a capitalist attitude? Is it not the generalized assurance of
all types of plentiful material goods? Then, why stigmatize Cubans who are true
to that mentality and who flee from hunger rather than from communism?

3.  As you can see my friend, the labels are beginning to change. It turns out
that the phantom of dissidence, which never was, is now turned into hunger.
Cuban revolutionaries do not hide our difficulties. It is true that mainly
because of the external situation and the criminal restrictions imposed by the
United States, which block our access to free trade, we are facing serious
deficiencies domestically and are having a difficult time standing in line. But
it is also true that we are not experiencing the tragedy of hunger because the
revolution is not allowing misery to hit our homes even under these exceptional
economic circumstances. Our life is austere but minimum sustenance is provided
even during these crucial times. We are not going to let up.

4.  Cubans do not believe in the capitalist miracle makers as this old goose
who dabbled in politics does. His opinion is based on (?headlines). But how can
he disregard what the U.S. press or the same edition of this newspaper says
about the social situation in the United States? We have to turn around the
question, what is the use of the generalized assurance of plentiful material
goods if certain problems are not solved in the United States? For example, one
out of every eight children under 12 years of age--this was published by the
MIAMI HERALD-- do not have their food needs met. It is estimated that currently
there are 5 million people who are classified as homeless. These people roam
the streets without permanent shelter and jobs and live off charity.

5.  What is the use of so much wealth if campaigns, such as the one underway in
Miami for the Cancer Society to collect funds that would allow patients to be
treated, have to be conducted? What is the use of so much wealth if the MIAMI
HERALD editorial appearing in the same edition in which the old journalist
wrote deals with the following dilemma for life in that country? The editorial
literally says: Statistics show the alarming increase of crime in the United
States of America from assault in the streets and on taxi drivers up to murders
because of drugs or other reasons. This growing criminality is seriously
affecting society. The editorial adds: Without any authority restricting the
increase in crime, law-abiding people with justified anxiety, fear, and even in
some instances panic, are abstaining from moving about freely because of the
immense danger of assault, rape, or being wounded with a knife or a firearm
which can result in immediate or eventual death.

6.  The editorial also says that many people in the United States no longer
feel free to walk down the street or to drive their car to visit friends or go
shopping during certain times of the day because they do not want to face the
danger of being attacked by criminals. The people do not feel free--says the
editorial--to walk down the streets and, in many cases, even be safe in the
privacy of their own homes. This is why such tight security measures are being
taken by installing security devices on windows and doors. This sense of danger
is a serious threat to honest people and social peace. Here, I end quoting the
editorial.

7.  This is some society which brags so much. Certainly, I agree that the
economic refugees should not be stigmatized. That hell is their paradise.
