FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Open and honest dialogue among delegates at the Constituent Congress
of the Science Workers Union, marked by the receptiveness of our Commander in
Chief Fidel Castro, characterized the first day of sessions of this historic
event, which will end today at the Convention Center.  Aspects such as
integration and mechanisms to strengthen collaboration among different
institutions were discussed as a way to make proper use of available resources,
especially those that are difficult to obtain.  During the plenary session with
researchers of the medical field, Fidel said:

2.  [Begin Castro recording] I believe that, despite the way resources are
distributed, we cannot avoid cooperation among institutions. It is impossible
to avoid cooperation. There are- I was thinking about this-21 medical
faculties. Any one of them can begin research on any kind of matter. From there
they must make an inventory of unused resources. I do not know what these
resources may be, but there are usually unused resources. In any research
center there may be unused or little-used equipment. How could we resolve this
practically if not through cooperation among institutions?

3.  One center can help another by cooperating or doing something for it
without selfishness. A center may have a good idea and they may say: Gosh, I
would like to develop this idea. At that moment two things could happen. One
thing that could happen is what you have said. They can come to work at the
center, which I believe is here in Havana. Right? [unknown person confirms his
statement] And they can receive help. The other thing that could happen would
be that if the center has resources which are not that important or
fundamental, and which are not needed for other investigations, they could
[word indistinct] or they could help them.

4.  It seems to me that if such a situation occurs we need objectively to
analyze what would be more beneficial: whether they need to come here, or
whether the center could provide them with resources for their research.  [end
recording]

5.  During the course of today's meeting, the structural organization of the
new workers union will be analyzed and its national committee will be elected.
