FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Part IV of an interview with President Fidel Castro by Nicaragua's Tomas
Borge; date, place not given- published on 4 June by the Mexico City EXCELSIOR
and Madrid EL PAIS; Part III published in the 8 June Latin America DAILY REPORT
page 18]

2.  [Text] [Borge] Do you think neoliberalism is an economic doctrine or a
political project that attempts to perpetuate the present economic order?

3.  [Castro] Neoliberalism not only attempts to perpetuate the present economic
order but to make it more cruel and more unfair and to control the world
according to the interests of the United States and developed capitalist
countries. Neoliberalism is the ideology of imperialism in its stage of world
hegemony. Neoliberalism consists of ideas that the imperialists try to impose
on all other countries. The United States, however, does not apply these ideas
to itself. While the United States tells Third World and Latin American
countries that they should avoid budget deficits, its own budget deficit
reaches $400 billion, a fact that turns the United States into a foreign
exchange sucking machine in the world market. The United States says there
should not be commercial deficits, but its own commercial deficit is the
largest. The United States says there should not be protectionist policies, but
the most prominent protectionist policies are applied in the United States. The
United States says neither industries nor agriculture should be subsidized, but
industry and agriculture are first of all subsidized in the United States. The
United States says no limitations should be imposed on free trade, while taking
advantage of this very same free exchange for its own benefit.

4.  The United States loots Latin American countries through interest and
profit on its investments; through the flight of capital; through unfair trade,
buying raw materials at low prices and selling the finished products at a high
price. Finally, the United States loots these countries through a
competitiveness in which the United States enjoys all the advantages to impose
its own technology.

5.  What future awaits these peoples? Life will show that this situation is
unbearable. Life will overthrow the present prestige of these capitalist,
neoliberal ideas.

6.  It is a matter of time because the United States is arming a huge time
bomb. What are we waiting for in thinking about these problems?

7.  [Borge] Apparently, defense activities and expenses continue in Cuba.  This
indicates preparation for an eventual U.S. military intervention. Do you regard
as reasonable a dialogue and negotiation between Cuba and the United States?

8.  [Castro] It would be absurd for us to make the mistake of neglecting our
defense at a time like this, when we are alone against the empire, with no
other power except our own and with no other resources except ours. This is why
reinforcing our defense is included in the priority programs of the special
period. There is a real danger, greater than ever, now that the United States
feels like the master and owner of the world, now that the United States is
immersed in a triumphant atmosphere, with a fanatical faith in its
sophisticated weapons and its power to impose its will on any people.

9.  It is unlikely that the United States will forgive us and forget about the
role that the Cuban revolution has played and continues to play. Surely, the
United States is deeply irritated over the fact that this small country shows
it possesses the ability to fight and resist. Consequently, for what you
mentioned, a negotiation, to happen, it would be necessary for the current U.S.
leaders to change their minds. I am not sure whether these changes will occur
in the near future.

10.  Quite the opposite, the United States thinks we are passing through a very
difficult time now that the socialist world and the Soviet Union have
disappeared, now that we are fighting this battle by ourselves, and because
this creates a favorable situation to impose its policy on us one way or
another.

11.  Many Americans are beginning to wonder about the basis for the U.S.
hostile policy toward Cuba, what sense does it make to act as if U.S. security
is at risk now that the other superpower is no more, now that the so-called
communist danger no longer exists in the world.

12.  They would have to reach the conclusion that this is a struggle without
glory, that there is nothing in it for them, and that it has no perspectives.
What might they plan to do with Cuba? Cause total chaos here? Create a warlike
situation for dozens of years? Where could U.S.  policy lead? The Cuban
revolutionaries will never surrender. No real Cuban revolutionary-and there are
millions-will give that up. The will of millions of persons willing to fight
cannot be quashed that way.

13.  The United States will not renounce its dream of eradicating the
revolution, but they have two paths to take: The path of hostility and
aggression or the path of peace with Cuba, respecting it and trying to
influence its political life through other means.

14.  Maybe we are better prepared to face a policy of aggression, because we
have learned to do it over more than 30 years, than to face a policy of peace.
Our principles do not preclude a policy of coexistence between the United
States and Cuba.

15.  [Borge] Fidel, judging by some recent events, the counterrevolution is
trying to create an internal front. To what point have they attained this goal?

16.  [Castro] It would be very difficult for them to create an internal front,
because they are isolated cases that have no support from the people. The
masses support the revolution, despite the fact that our masses are critical.
Our masses may complain about problems, but when it comes to taking a position
between the counterrevolution and the revolution, between the fatherland and
the enemies of the fatherland, there is not the slightest shade of doubt. I
believe this spirit has been strengthened amid the special period. That is an
interesting and curious fact, in spite of the enemy's efforts, which
undoubtedly have had some effect and influence on some sectors.

17.  [Borge] Do you feel isolated or supported?

18.  [Castro] The solidarity and friendship are undoubtedly growing. Let's
differentiate between the concepts of solidarity and friendship.

19.  Let's apply the concept of solidarity to the peoples. We can say that
solidarity grows daily in the people. That is obvious.

20.  Let's use the concept of friendship for the governments. We have seen an
increase-not over the last months, but over the last years-of the friendship
and respect from governments, particularly from Latin American governments.

21.  There is friendship and respect. That is obvious and I do not think we
should stress that too much, because the first thing we have to bear in mind is
that we must be discreet in our international relations to avoid putting any
government in a delicate situation or cause them any problems. I had friendly
contacts with many of the Latin American leaders during the Guadalajara meeting
and, in general, they were very friendly and respectful with regard to Cuba.

22.  I had the opportunity to meet very interesting, intelligent, and valuable
people, which turned out to be very stimulating.

23.  [Borge] I would now like to talk about the essential battle for the
survival of the Cuban revolution in the economic field. What is the immediate
plan and what is the strategy?

24.  [Castro] We have been carrying out a number of programs related to the
correction process. That process started, approximately, in 1986 and we started
using material and human resources really efficiently in a number of important
programs aimed at solving social problems and economic development plans. By
1989, on the 26 July anniversary in Camaguey, I proposed things that sounded
strange to many.

25.  Speaking about our readiness to fight, I said: ``We must be more realistic
than ever. But we have to speak out. We have to warn imperialism not to have so
many illusions regarding our revolution and regarding the idea that our
revolution could not withstand a debacle in the socialist community. If
tomorrow or any other day we were to wake up to the news of major civil strife
within the USSR, or even if we were to wake up to the news that the USSR had
disintegrated-something we hope will never happen-even in those circumstances,
Cuba and the Cuban Revolution would continue to fight and resist.'' Note that I
said those things two and a half years before the disintegration of the USSR.
Of course, all our ongoing programs were threatened.

26.  [Borge] What happened then?

27.  [Castro] With great pain, we were obliged to establish priorities and
implement the special period in peacetime. Many years before, from the time of
Reagan's threats, we had created the programs and plans for a special period in
wartime, which is equivalent to a total naval economic blockade in which
nothing could enter the country. We planned what to do and how to survive under
those circumstances. Based on those plans for the special period in wartime, we
developed plans for the special period in peacetime, in which there would not
be a total naval blockade, but our resources would be severely limited. It is
enough to say that we are operating with less than 50 percent of the imported
fuel we formerly operated on, and with 40 percent or less of the imports that
the country used to receive.

28.  What did we propose? That the special period serve not only to withstand,
but also to develop. There would be a great decline in production of all
nonessential things. We would have to practically paralyze our social
development programs, our programs for the construction of housing, child-care
centers, special schools, vocational schools, and universities.

29.  Our priority programs-programs related to biotechnology, the
pharmaceutical industry, and medical equipment, for example-continued to be
developed fully.  The tourism program continued on its course. The food
program, which is in first place, continued, but with some important
limitations. Scientific programs continued on their course.

30.  Some of these programs, such as the tourism program, were already being
carried out partially in association with foreign capital. Thus, to us, the
essential issue is not just to survive, but also to develop, regardless of the
privations to which we may be submitted for an undetermined time.

31.  [Borge] How did you envision the distribution of resources?

32.  [Castro] As a premise, we said that in a special period, resources have to
be distributed to everyone. No citizen can be left unemployed. That is the
difference between our policies and shock policies. We do not apply shock
policies; what we do is regulate almost all products that are distributed. I
would say that what the country is doing with its meager resources is truly
miraculous, truly miraculous. How have we managed? We have managed with the
people's cooperation.

Report Type:         Daily report             AFS Number:     PA0906134492
Report Number:       FBIS-LAT-92-112          Report Date:    10 Jun 92
Report Series:       Daily Report             Start Page:     5
Report Division:     CARIBBEAN                End Page:       7
Report Subdivision:  Cuba                     AG File Flag:
Classification:      UNCLASSIFIED             Language:       Spanish
Document Date:       06 Jun 92
Report Volume:       Wednesday Vol VI No 112

Dissemination:

City/Source of Document:   Managua EL NUEVO DIARIO

Report Name:   Latin America

Headline:   Part 5 of Interview With Fidel Castro

Author(s):   Nicaragua's Tomas Borge in Havana; date not given- published on 4
June by Mexico City EXCELSIOR and Madrid EL PAIS; Part IV
published in the 9 June Latin America DAILY REPORT pages 2-4]

Source Line:   PA0906134492 Managua EL NUEVO DIARIO in Spanish 6 Jun 92 p 4

Subslug:   [Part 5 of interview with President Fidel Castro by Nicaragua's
Tomas Borge in Havana; date not given- published on 4 June by Mexico
City EXCELSIOR and Madrid EL PAIS; Part IV published in the 9 June
Latin America DAILY REPORT pages 2-4]

FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Part 5 of interview with President Fidel Castro by Nicaragua's Tomas Borge
in Havana; date not given- published on 4 June by Mexico City EXCELSIOR and
Madrid EL PAIS; Part IV published in the 9 June Latin America DAILY REPORT
pages 2-4]

2.  [Text] [Borge] What are the most important products manufactured in
scientific biotechnical and pharmacological laboratories?

3.  [Castro] One of the most important is the B-type meningococcal virus
vaccine because it is the only one in the world and its efficiency is
impressive. We have obtained an epidermic growth factor and it is being handled
by one or two transnationals. We also have streptokinase, a product we have
obtained through genetic engineering, which makes it much cheaper than the one
obtained through other procedures. It is highly efficient when needed to
paralyze an infarction and prevent the necrosis of heart muscles affected by an
infarction. This is a really impressive development.

4.  I can mention the vaccine for viral hepatitis B. Its quality is high and it
is highly efficient.

5.  We have been working on monoclonal antibodies, which can be used for a
diagnose or for therapeutic purposes.  We have developed different types of
interferon. We have been developing several blood by-products, such as
Intaeglobin, which is tremendously efficient against infections, above all in
newborns.

6.  One of the most important products we have developed is one for
cholesterol. It is highly efficient, a natural product, and I think its uses
are many. Its commercial name is Ateromixol, but it is generally known as PPG-
it was first known by this acronym -but that is not its commercial name. It is
a highly efficient product with vast possibilities in blood circulation, heart
diseases, and circulatory problems. I do not want to expand on this because we
are still in the research phase.

7.  [Borge] It is said PPG increases the amatory level.

8.  [Castro] Well, PPG is also miraculous in that sense because it generally
improves a person's sex life. It is really a friend for lovers, but we are not
actually marketing it for that purpose because we are still developing the
appropriate medical protocols.

9.  We know a lot about this product. I will tell you a little, I would rather
tell you only a little about it. All I want to tell you is that, using this
product as a basis, we can manufacture a number of products with magnificent
properties.

10.  We are working on a vaccine against cholera and I think we will soon
obtain results. Researchers are very optimistic about the possibility of
finding an efficient vaccine against this disease because the existing one is
less than 50 percent effective and its durability is short.

11.  [Borge] Fidel, talking about this, it is said a chemical revolution has
followed the development of certain countries; and a physical revolution was
followed by a subsequent development. I wonder: If the syllogism works, is
development expected after a biotechnical revolution?

12.  [Castro] Yes, of course, it has become one of the essential elements of
development.

13.  We are now using biotechnology to produce new plant varieties. We are
using it in tissue cultures to find seeds.  For instance, we are developing
plantain plantations at a tremendous speed.

14.  Through biotechnology, we are developing biofertilizers-bacteria that
fertilize plants by taking nitrogen from the air and giving it to the plants,
either by combining with the plants, or with the soil, or rather with the
organic matter in the soil. We are developing biopesticides. The biopesticides
are obtained through these biotechnological processes.

15.  In these fields, we can compete with, and even beat, the developed
countries because we have cooperation among all the scientific research
centers. This cannot be achieved through research organized by private
enterprises.

16.  [Borge] How many scientific research centers does Cuba have at this
moment?

17.  [Castro] We have over 170 scientific research centers or units. Over 170!
There is no country in the third world with the level of scientific development
Cuba has achieved. There are many developed countries that do not have the
degree of scientific development Cuba has achieved in many fields.

18.  This must become one of the pillars of our country's development. One day,
this can have more value and importance than the income from the sugar
industry.

19.  [Borge] How are the difficulties in every day life expressed in the
inevitable problems they cause to the population?

20.  [Castro] The difficulties are many and serious, and the human being is
human, he suffers if he wants something and cannot have it, or if he wants more
and cannot have it. The human being also has understanding, intelligence, and
instincts. We consistently explain to the people what we do and how we do it.
That way we get tremendous cooperation from the people who know that our cause
is fair and that it must be defended.

21.  [Borge] In Latin America and the rest of the world there is insistent talk
about human rights in Cuba. Although you have already spoken about this topic,
I would like you to tell me what is the real situation of human rights in this
country?

22.  [Castro] I have the most sincere conviction-speaking serenely and
objectively-that no other country in the world has done more for human rights
than Cuba.

23.  Bear in mind, for instance, that in our country you do not see children
begging, homeless, or abandoned in the streets; but you see that in the rest of
the world, even in the developed countries. Basically in third world countries,
there are dozens and dozens of millions of abandoned and homeless children,
without parents or support, begging in the streets, swallowing fire, or putting
on some other spectacle to make a living: Could there be another country that
has done more for human rights than what we have done?

24.  If you consider that now children are sold and even exported to other
countries and commercial enterprises have been created for exporting children;
if you consider that children are marketed and sold in the world and with some
frequency there are cases in which children are sold so their vital organs can
be used for transplants; then you come across a country like ours in which not
a single one of those cases has occurred: Could there be a country that has
done more for human rights than ours?

25.  If you consider that child prostitution is widespread in the third world,
that children are even used for sexual trade or for sexual scenes and such
things, but there has not been a single such case in Cuba: Has any country done
more for human rights than ours?

26.  You will find, for example, that infant mortality in many countries is
more than 100 for every 1,000 born alive, that the average in Latin America is
above 60, which means that hundreds of thousands of children die every year,
and then you find that our country-a third world, underdeveloped county, a
country that has been blockaded, a country that is blockaded twice as much now-
has reduced infant mortality to 10.7 in children under one year of age, and
that in over 30 years of revolution the lives of hundreds of thousands of
children have been saved: Could there be a country that has done more for human
rights than Cuba?

27.  If you consider that life expectancy at birth has been increased
considerably, to over 75 years of age, from the time of the revolution to
today: Could there be a country that has done more for human rights than Cuba?

28.  If you consider that the world in general, especially the third world, is
full of unemployed men, women, and youths, and senior citizens without any kind
of social protection, and you find that in our country all men and women, all
citizens, receive social protection through retirement, pensions, and social
security, and not a single citizen has been neglected throughout the years of
the revolution: Could there be a country that has done more for human rights
than Cuba?

29.  If you consider the influence that equality has on the human being and on
his happiness-equality of opportunity and treatment-if you realize that in our
country the irritating differences between the millionaires and the beggars
have disappeared: Could any country do more for human rights than Cuba?

30.  If you consider that in over 30 years, measures of force have never been
taken against our people, in over 30 years there has never been suppression of
a demonstration by workers, peasants, students, or other citizens; in over 30
years no policeman or soldier has ever been set against the people to beat or
repress them, nor have water trucks, tear gas, or birdshot been used, as is the
daily happening in developed capitalist countries and the third world, I ask
myself: Could there have been any country with more respect for civil or human
rights than our country?
