FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Excerpt] As we have already mentioned, the Constituent Congress of the
Science Workers Union today began its session at the Convention Center with the
attendance of Commander in Chief Fidel Castro. Of the 330 delegates from
educational, production, and research centers, 83 percent work directly in
research while the rest support these efforts.

2.  In the morning session, the congress analyzed priorities in the sciences
and how to disseminate the main scientific results, especially those that will
allow the country to succeed despite the current difficulties. Journalist Juan
Carlos Roque Garcia has some notes on this constituent congress, which will
continue until tomorrow.

3.  [Roque] As you may remember, the initiative was presented by Commander in
Chief Fidel Castro at the last congress of the Education, Science, and Sports
Workers Union when he said: It is not possible, and especially not now in the
special period, to do without a science workers union. It is impossible when
you see the work this union does and could do in promoting these activities.

4.  The time between the initial idea of creating this union and its
realization is short. The almost two months of organizational work and the
holding of assemblies at the base level were proof of the complete
identification of workers with forming the union and their desire to become
part of it. The direct work of the union with the masses will now be a decisive
factor in achieving the action that will allow the continued strengthening of
relations between researchers, technicians, and workers in charge of spreading
their results to production, education, and services on a national level.

5.  It was at this session of the constituent congress, where the results of
applied research are being presented, that Fidel spoke of the multidisciplinary
groups in agriculture.

6.  [Begin Castro recording] There are some enterprises that are tripling their
production in relation to 1990. An example is the enterprise in Batabano. But
all the state enterprises are more than doubling their production in relation
to 1990. I can see the efforts of scientists in these results. They are playing
a role. Without this, there would not be [word indistinct]. We have some
peasant scientists. There is a small group-I wish they were all
scientists-there is a small group of very outstanding peasants, and we have
appointed them to be advisers.  [end recording]

7.  With the holding of this congress the National Science Workers Union has
emerged as the third integrating force of all scientific efforts. In the past,
the union movement in this sector was organized to oversee the activities of
fundamental research and its administrative support. This did not allow the
integration and the exchange needed for this work. [passage omitted]
