FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Excerpts] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro decorated a group of prominent
scientists and awarded the labor deed banner to 11 research centers on Cuban
Science Day. [passage omitted]

2.  During the ceremony, 23 scientists received the Carlos J. Finlay Order and
11 research centers received the labor deed banner. [passage omitted] Before
presenting the awards, our commander in chief spoke with the scientists and
other representatives from the scientific field. Fidel referred to the
importance of our results and gave as an example three acheivements: two at the
National Center for Scientific Research and one at the Biotechnical and Genetic
Engineering Center, which are being used at the Luis Diaz Soto Higher Naval
Institute of Medicine to try to save the life of the young soldier, Rolando
Perez Quintosa.

3.  During his remarks, Fidel referred to the concept of the scientific poles
as a way to coordinate and support research even more. He stated that even
though this year, 1992, will be the most difficult year in the history of the
revolution, it could be the most significant in the history of science.

4.  [Begin Castro recording] I do not think that more attention is given to
science anywhere else in the world than in Cuba. We are aware of all that it
can give the country. By being humane and speaking of ourselves, we will share
with the rest. As we resolve our problems we will resolve problems for the
rest. It has been proven that our people have scientific qualities. Others have
poetic qualities, and Cubans undoubtedly also have those qualities. Nicaraguans
say that every Nicaraguan is a poet. [chuckles] We could say here, today, that
every citizen of this country.... [changes thought] There are hundreds of
thousands of scientists. Even the individual that manufactures the small parts
and looks for solutions is a scientist and an investigator of a sort. [end
recording]

5.  The preparatory committee of the constituents' congress of the National
Science Workers Labor Union was presented during this meeting. Engineer and
scientist Martha Cabrisas, member of the National Secretariat of the Cuban
Workers Federation, will chair the committee. She read the invitation to this
congress to which 300 democratically-elected delegates from scientific related
centers will attend. The main objectives the science union should achieve were
read during the meeting. They encouragee cooperation, expanding accomplishments
and the length of research projects.

6.  [Begin Fidel recording] I wish all of you a great scientific year with many
successes. [end recording]
