FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE: 1.  [Speech by Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet,
upon acceptance of the Jose Marti Order from Cuban President Fidel Castro at a
ceremony for this purpose at Revolution Palace on 8 July-recorded]

2.  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] The Vietnamese people greatly admire the
firmness and heroism with which the Cuban people are facing up to the special
period. Due to our own experiences, we are convinced that the Cuban people will
most assuredly manage to vercome the current difficulties and continue to move
their nation forward.

3.  The Vietnamese people reiterate their unflagging solidarity with the just
cause of the Cuban people in defense of their independence and sovereignty,
national dignity, and their chosen path of building socialism for the greater
happiness of the population.

4.  We demand an immediate end to the policy of blockade and embargo against
Cuba. The portion of Cuban territory on which the Guantanamo Naval Base is
located must be returned to its true, legitimate owner: the Cuban people.
There is no power capable of orcing a surrender from such as the Cuban people,
which has made so many sacrifices for its independence and freedom and for the
independence and freedom of many other peoples as well.

5.  Beloved comrades, with the spirit and will of over three decades of
struggle for independence and freedom, and with the experience of almost two
decades of constructing the nation at an extremely difficult juncture, our
entire party and people have been and are still deeply involved in
indefatigable efforts aimed at finding, step by step, (?our own) path (?toward)
socialism and a greater and more beautiful Vietnam, as our esteemed and beloved
Uncle Ho desired.

6.  Throughout our long and difficult struggle, we have always been able to
count on having at our side a firm and extremely faithful companion in the
struggle: the fraternal [Communist] Party, as well as the Government and
people, of Cuba and its highest epresentative, the esteemed and beloved
President Fidel Castro, who has given the Vietnamese people powerful support
and disinterested assistance in the spirit that for Vietnam Cuba is willing to
give even its very blood. The heartfelt words uttered by Fidel, and those deep
sentiments of friendship and affection, constitute a very strong source of
motivation that help our fighters and compatriots overcome difficulties and
trust solidly in the final victory. These are feelings that the Vietnamese of
today, as well as future generations, will carry always, etched in their minds
and hearts.

7.  We are proud of the close and faithful ties that have united our two
peoples throughout all these years of fierce struggle and arduous labor. We
feel even more satisfaction today because at socialism's most difficult
moments, the Vietnamese and Cuban people continue to be united in the struggle
for the revolutionary cause in their respective countries, as well as for
socialism. This is solidarity that can exist only between two revolutionary
peoples, between two parties infinitely faithful to Marxism-Leninism and to
socialism. We promise to do everything possible to unceasingly consolidate and
develop the many kinds of relations that exist between our two parties and
peoples.

8.  At the present, extremely significant moment, and in an ambience radiant
with friendship, camaraderie, and brotherhood, I say: May the people of Cuba,
under the leadership of the Cuban Communist Party headed by our esteemed and
beloved comrade, Fidel Castro, fulfill victoriously the historic mission of
firmly defending- and may they continue hoisting the flag of-socialism in the
western hemisphere.

9.  I express my hope that the militant solidarity in the relations of
friendship and fraternal cooperation between our two communist parties and
peoples, the Vietnamese and Cuban, will be eternally indestructible.  Thank you
very much.
