FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Christof Parnreiter report: ``Fidel Castro's Cautious Renewal'']

2.  [Text] Havana-With the nomination of the leader of the Communist Youth of
Cuba, Roberto Robaina (37), as new foreign minister, state and party leader
Fidel Castro apparently made a cautious step toward a less dogmatic policy.

3.  Apart from Robaina, economic expert and Vice President Carlos Lage and
Ricardo Alarcon, former foreign minister and current parliamentary president,
also belong to the ``new generation'' that tends toward a pragmatic policy.

4.  Just like Alarcon (56), Robaina has repeatedly confirmed his readiness for
dialogue with the United States-on the basis that Washington gives up its
blockade policy. In that case, ``a great deal would undoubtedly change'' in
Cuba, Alarcon stated in an interview with DER STANDARD correspondent Christof
Parnreiter in Havana.  ``We would no longer view anybody as a U.S. agent, for
example, because agents would no longer exist.''

5.  Alarcon rejected the most recent allegations by the UN Human Rights
Commission against Cuba: ``This report mentions 51 cases, but the reproaches
are unfounded.'' Only people who violate the laws are prosecuted in Cuba, and
there are no restrictions concerning trips abroad, Alarcon claimed in spite of
the fact that Cubans are trying to escape to the United States every week with
the most adventurous water vehicles. ``Everybody who wants to leave can leave.
Yet the United States and Europe build walls against the refugees.''

6.  Despite the change of power in Washington, the danger of a military
intervention might even increase in the next few years. ``If the United States
cannot eliminate us with a blockade, it might be tempted to view an invasion
as a last resort. However, the abolition of a government is not involved here,
but rather the elimination of a social project. The U.S. Army would have to
fight against numerous people.'' However, Alarcon also tries to dash the hopes
of some members of the opposition who believe that the end of the blockade
might destroy the cohesion among the Cuban regime: ``We are not afraid of
that. Why does the United States not test that and suspend the blockade for
one year to see what will happen?''
