FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE: 1.  [Review of Fidel's conversation with ``Hoy Mismo''
crew following his televised appearance on that program New Year's Eve, by
Soledad Cruz]

2.  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] In difficult moments, in bitter times of
betrayals or attacks, our first thought is ``how will Fidel feel''? And when
people see him content, his happiness is reproduced, amplified in everyone. Now
that 1993 is about to begin, I will allow myself the very great pleasure of
reminding everyone of our achievements at this end of the year.

3.  They are not what the press in Miami is glorifying, of course. We are
creating our true achievements here.  With exemplary resistance in such a
difficult year, with the Plaza filled with happiness, confidence, and love,
this is a flight to immortality iloted by an exceptional man, a stubborn man, a
man who clings to all the dreams that have led him to put aside the bonanzas of
an easy life through inheritance and, instead, devote himself fully to the
lasting pleasure of living for other people.

4.  He devotes himself to matters as simple and as tremendous as probing the
mysteries of the universe. He cares that his people develop themselves, that
they have access to the best of what is created by this planet's inhabitants,
while he also visits work groups and reviews agricultural plans, stimulating
the maximum yields so that nourishment for neither the body nor the soul will
be lacking.

5.  History's dwarfs will blaspheme and slander him, will cite his mistakes and
faults; as people said about Marti, the ungrateful were dissatisfied with the
sun. But for his sensitive and intelligent people, it is enough to see him
smiling to believe that the shadows are growing lighter, that victory is
possible.

6.  That is why we shall be more patriotic, more courageous, more
revolutionary, as he asked of us in his message for the year that is beginning.
We will not betray his confidence in us, for he has never betrayed our trust in
him.  That is the mystery which those who have not shared these 34 years of
intimacy between the people and Fidel cannot understand, an intimacy that I
have felt renewed and flourishing on this eve of 1993.

7.  This is something that cannot be measured in statistics, but that can be
felt near him: Fidel's eagerness to do all he can to improve the lives of the
people. And when he sits down with the people, they clothe him in a thick
mantle of unending devotion. That is why I can only relate this emotion to
welcome in the new year.
