FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE: 1.  [Report by journalist Dania Diegues from Convention
Center in Havana; passages within quotation marks recorded Castro remarks]

2.  [Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro today gave the closing speech at the
Fourth Latin American and Caribbean Meeting for Solidarity, Sovereignty,
Self-Determination, and the Lives of Our Peoples.

3.  ``I think that not only Cuba is going through a special period. All of
Latin America is going through a special period. I say that the nations of the
Third World are in a special period. I say that the world itself is in a
special period, except for the superprivileged minorities that flaunt power
even in the developed capitalist countries.  There are, in the United States, a
developed country, Hispanic populations, populations of Hispanic origin, which
are suffering terrible conditions there. Every black population of the United
States could be called the Third World within the United States. One cannot
speak much about indigenous populations over there in the United States because
they exterminated them.''

4.  The question those attending this meeting of social and people's movements
asked themselves was: Is capitalism the only path to development for the
hemisphere? No!

5.  [Castro] ``Capitalism is fated to devour itself. Since...  [rephrases]
First it created colonialism. With colonialism, it created underdevelopment, by
virtue of which 80 percent of mankind, over 4 billion people today live in
poverty, although there are a number of rich people in many of those
countries-people quite rich indeed. But three-fourths... [corrects himself]
four-fifths of mankind belongs to that underdeveloped world; we could say, to
that Third World. And that is where the very serious problems, and the very
serious contradictions arise- from the fact that capitalism is obliged to grow
nonstop.  If the growth stops, it is a catastrophe, for the United States,
Japan, or Europe. Factories are shut down. Production and service businesses go
bankrupt, banks fail, insurance companies fold. The system fails when expansion
stops.

6.  And a system that is obliged to expand continously is disastrous for the
world. Besides, it is illogical. It is absurd. And just look at the kind of
things people do, precisely right now, at a time when hunger is growing in the
world, when there is more hunger than ever-and more poverty. How did they solve
the problems between Europe and the United States over the agricultural
matters? They agreed to kill millions of cows in Europe.  Millions of cows. To
kill millions of cows when there are hundreds f millions of children who do not
drink milk is a crime, [repeats] a crime!`` [applause]

7.  A consensus was reached that unity among our peoples is indispensable. On
the 141st anniversary of the birth of Jose Marti, one of the predecessors of
Latin American unity, we are still crying out for it.
